Certification of Narconcm Chilocco
Is Not Acceptable
For The Following Reasons:

The Narconon program is unacceptable as a legitimate treatment
program for many reasons:
Because the source of the program, L. Ron Hubbard was
unqualified; his program has never received the necessary
independent scientific study to verify it's effectiveness and claims of
success; and the program deviously inculcates in its patients the basic
tenants of the "religion" of Scientology as part of the treatment
program itself.
Narconon has terminated more units in the US than it currently has
in operation in spite of claims of worldwide acceptance, astounding
cure rates and enormous patient counts.
The Narconon organization is an inseparable part of a classic
destructive cult that strongly exhibits the characteristics of mind
control, and it is so vigorously opposed to legitimate mental health
care professionals that it considers them to be criminals.

A.L. Ron Hubbard Unqualified
L. Ron Hubbard, author and source of the Narconon Drug Treatment Program
was not qualified in any discipline even remotely related to drug treatment or
rehabilitation.

1. Educational Background - embellished beyond imagination Documented
details available in several books:
"A Piece of Blue Sky"
By Jon Atack
Carol Publishing Group, 120 Enterprise Ave., Secaucus, NJ 07094

"Bare-Faced MeSsiah"
By Russell Miller
Henry Holt & Company, 115 West 18th St. New York, NY 10011

"Messiah or Madman?
By Bent Corydon
Lyle Stuart, 120 Enterprise Avenue, Secaucus, N.J. 07094

2. Military Background - same

3. Professional Career - fiction writer


B. Narconon Program Unproven
The Narconon Drug Treatment Program has never been proven to be safe and
successful by independent research.

1. In operation over 20 years with no acceptable independent research.

2. Source of the program, L. Ron Hubbard during his over 30 years of
writing, never produced one paper that met the criteria of acceptable
scientific study.

3. Claims of cure rates as high as 86% can not be accurately substantiated
and in fact, the criteria on which those claims are based varies from time to
time and from spokesman to spokesman within the program's management.

4. Patient count figures are wildly exaggerated, often stated as in the
hundred's of thousands with no verifiable documentation.

5. Medically and scientifically trained people in the field have examined
the documents upon which the Narconon program is based and find them
inaccurate, misleading, and possibly dangerous to the health of patients.

a. Of the document, Dr. Everett R. Rhoades, M.D., Assistant
Surgeon General of the Indian Health Service, Public Health Service,
Department of Health and Human Services said, "...the 'Purification
Rundown' concept cannot be considered medically sound."

b. Said Dr. William B. Svoboda, M.D., (Pediatric and Adolescent
Neurology and Epileptology, Wichita, Ks.) of the Purification
Rundown document: "... Hubbard's theories in general are just that...
theories without controlled proof. He flings facts around wildly in
excess... to drown the readers in facts in order to convince them that
he knows..."

c. Dr. Mark Palmer, M.D., Internal Medicine, Ponca City, says: "I
think it is fair to say that the Purification Rundown is without
merit," and further, "In general, it appears to me that the overall
program being advocated by Narconon is nothing more than a
poorly disguised program for obtaining recruits into the Church of
Scientology..."

d. According to Dr. Bruce Roe, Ph.D., Professor of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of Oklahoma, Norman: "Overall the
program proposed by Mr. Hubbard is pure unadulterated 'cowpies'.
It is filled with some scientific truth, but mainly is illogical and the

2


conclusions drawn by Mr. Hubbard are without any basis in scientific
fact..."

e. Of Narconon's progenitor, Dr. Louis Jolyon West, M.D.,
Professor of Psychiatry, University of California, Los Angeles, says:
Scientology is an insidious and dangerous cult. Its founder, L. Ron
Hubbard, was a science-fiction writer whose career as a mental
healer was founded on extravagant lies and deception."

f. Dr. David Hogg, M.D., Toronto, Canada: "In summary, Hubbard
is a very ignorant man. He consistently demonstrates a complete and
at times dangerous lack of knowledge concerning biochemistry,
physics, and medicine. His theories are based on fallacies and lies;
there is no scientific data to support any of them... His program not
only fails to deliver what it promises but may actually be detrimental
to the health of those taking it."

g. The Tennant evaluation of Narconon New Life in Los Angeles,
issued by Dr. Forest S. Tennant, Jr., M.D., P.H. to the California
State Health Department in 1974 said among many other things: "In
the case of Narconon New Life, there was adequate indication that
public money is being used for purposes other than drug
rehabilitation... Our evaluation indicates such an inseparable
programmatic and theoretical relationship between Narconon and the
Church of Scientology that specifically religious practices are
commonly used in the treatment of clients within the Narconon New
Life program. Such practices include E-Meter auditing by ministers
of the Church of Scientology and the use of educational material and
organizational theory adopted from Church of Scientology writings
by L. Ron Hubbard..."

h. Former U.S. Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, as a member of
the National Coalition Against Health Fraud, has criticized the
"Purification Program" or "Hubbard Method" which is central to the
Narconon program. Specifically, he opposed it's promotion in the
book "Diet for a Poisoned Planet" by David Steinman, published by
Harmony Books, which carried the suggestion by James Marcus (a
known Scientology spokesman) of the EPA that people should
undertake the program at a Scientology clinic in California known as
HealthMed. Scientology, of course, was not mentioned in the book,
and Dr. Marcus leaves the impression that the program is approved
by the EPA. Mr. Marcus has been involved in previous such
implications in the past, one involving his recommendation that
firemen in Shreeveport LA be treated at HealthMed after being
exposed to a PCB fire. After paying over $100,000.00, the city of


Shreeveport hired independent experts to evaluate the program, and
consequently terminated it as useless.

i. Dr. Robert E. Geary, D.D.S., past member 648 Mental Health
Board of Medina County, OH, who underwent the Purification
program himself says, "As a health care practitioner that has
participated in their so-called Purification rundown, which is the
basis for Narconon's treatment program, I would say it is bunk." and
further, "Following my wife's purification program, she began
having difficulty sleeping, having hallucinations and other bizarre
symptoms which the Scientologists told her were normal. She
eventually required hospitalization... I consider their treatment to be
unscientific and dangerous."

j. An independent (non-Scientology related) study of the Purification
Rundown was proposed in 1985 by Dr. Joseph Miceli, Associate
Professor of Pediatrics and Pharmacology, Children's Hospital of
Michigan. Dr. Miceli's proposal suggested that the method might
actually have some value in reducing toxins (PBBs and PCBs) from
the body - but not for any of the reasons suggested by its author, L.
Ron Hubbard.
However, the Human Subject Review Committee at Wayne State
University refused to allow the study to proceed because it was
deemed unfit for human expirmentation, according to Dr. Doug
Spathelf, research director at Central Michigan University, and Dr.
Danial Graf, research director at Wayne State University.

6. Narconon is unable to produce a single non-Scientology expert who will
support their program with scientific or medical evidence. The "experts"
they often trot out always turn out to be deeply steeped in Scientology. Dr.
Chamberlain is a Ph.D., retired, and an OT VIII Scientologist. So was his
sidekick Dr. Dean. Dr. Megan Shields is a longtime Scientologist. All of
the documents and articles produced in defense of Narconon's methods
inevitably refer to "research" done by the Foundation for Advancements in
Science and Education, which is an organization formed by Scientologists
"to advance the efficacy of and use of the methods of L. Ron Hubbard."

7. The Narconon drug treatment program is not listed in any of the
nationally recognized drug treatment reference books commonly used by
physicians or other professionals.

8. Narconon has never been accredited by any independent national
medical or scientific accreditation firm in the United States. The Narconon
treatment program has never been certified by any state government that
we know of. Some of it's facilities have received a perfunctory State Health

4


Department license for reasonably good housekeeping, but this is
concerned primarily with the facility housing the program, and not the
program itself.

9. Success or cure in the Narconon program is considered to have
happened when the patient subjectively believes that his body is free of
drug residue, with no other form of prior or post testing required. The
patient must immediately "attest" to his cure, and if no glowing testimonial
is forthcoming, the program must be continued, or repeated.

a. The program often uses an E-Meter to determine if the patient's
feeling that he is cured is "True" or not. An E-Meter is a religious
artifact of the Church of Scientology, and not a scientifically or
medically approved device. Its use requires the services of a
Scientology minister.

b. Further promotion of the Narconon program is through the use
of these so-called "Success Stories" subjectively given by the patient
immediately upon completion of the program. Testimonial and
anecdotal evidence may be useful in postulating a theory, but does
not constitute scientifically acceptable proof.

c. Former Narconon staff member Jerry Whitfield was statistician at
the E1 Paso, Tx., Narconon where he produced a "cure rate" of over
80% based on 6 responses to 20 questionairs mailed to previous
patients.

10. The criteria for admission to Narconon as a patient appears to be
questionable. In most documented cases, the only criteria were the verbal
admission of the patient that he was a drug abuser, and approval by the
admissions director after an interview with the patient to determine his
"attitude" towards the program. Considering that the organization teaches
that all humans are "aberated" by ingested toxins of one kind or another
and all require the Purification Rundown and related rituals in order to
make progress ( or "case gain"), exactly what constitutes a "drug abuser" is
questionable to begin with. Narconon has also historically been found to
lack adequate follow-up procedures, and any actual recoveries can
probably be accounted for as:

a. Recoveries which would have occurred without their treatment,
or by treatment in any other facility, because of the sincere desire of
the individual himself.

b. Temporary Placebo-Effect recoveries

5


c. Religious conversion to Scientology with its severe strictures
against drugs of all kinds, medicine, and professional mental health
care.

11. There are physiological and psychological effects of the Narconon
Purification Program that should be considered and evaluated before the
program is accepted as scientifically accurate, safe, and effective.
Specifically:

a. Symptomatic physiological-psychological stress:
1. Excessive acid intake may cause gastric distress
aa. Acetic acid in Cal-Mag formula
bb. Gram quantities of ascorbic acid
cc. Gram quantities of nicotinic acid
2. Nicotinic acid reaction may be stressful
aa. Skin irritation
bb. Itching and burning
3. Unmonitored and uncontrolled exercise may be excessive
for age and physical condition
  aa. Tachycardia
  bb. Breathing difficulties
  4. Sauna heat may cause heat stress
  aa. Body temperature rise, unmonitored temperature
  bb. Peripheral vaso-dilation
  cc. Hypotension, unmonitored blood pressure
  dd. Inadequate fluid replacement, unmonitored weight
  5. Nicotinic acid reaction may exacerbate:
  aa. peripheral vaso-dilation
  bb. Hypotension
  cc. Tachycardia

  b. Asymptomatic physiological stress:
  1. Excessive acid intake may cause gastric damage
  aa. Acetic acid in Cal-Mag formula
  bb. Gram Quantities of Ascorbic acid
  cc. Gram quantities of nicotinic acid
  2. Excessive acid intake may cause blood acid-base imbalance
  aa. Acetic acid in Cal-Mag formula
  bb. Gram Quantities of Ascorbic acid
  cc. Gram quantities of nicotinic acid
  3. Copious sweating may cause electrolyte disturbances
  aa. Unmonitored and uncontrolled fluid loss
  dehydration
  bb. Electrolyte loss through sweating
  cc. Unmonitored and uncontrolled Cal-Mag ingestion

  6


  dd. Unmonitored and uncontrolled NA and K ingestion
  4. Excessive and unmonitored trace mineral intake
  aa. Excessive iron
  bb. Excessive copper

  c. Psychological effects:
  1. Bodily discomfort and pains
  2. Torpor, stupor, lethargy
  3. Difficulty concentrating, light headedness, mental drifting
  4. "Re-experiencing" (imagining or hallucinating) earlier drug
  episodes from both this life and/or past lives

  C. Incorporates "Religion" As Part Of Treatment
  The Narconon Program constitutes the involuntary inculcation of Scientology
  religious beliefs and practices in the patient as a part of the treatment program
  itself and therefore certification of this program would constitute the
  enfranchisement of a religion by the state, which is illegal.

  1. Examination of the Scientology Religious Progress Chart known as the
  Bridge To Total Freedom shows the following religious steps taken by
  every Scientologist who enters the "church":

  a. The Happiness Rundown
  b. The Purification Rundown
  c. The TR Course
  d. The Drug Rundown
  e. The Objectives program

  2. Examination of the Narconon Technical Line-Up Chart shows the
  following treatment steps:

  a. The Happiness Rundown
  b. The Purification Rundown
  c. The TR Course
  d. The Drug Rundown
  e. The Objectives program

  3. Examination of the content of each of the above five steps shows that
  both are identical; there is no essential difference between the entry levels
  of Church of Scientology "religious" training and processing and the
  Narconon treatment program.

  4. The titles of the steps of the Narconon treatment program may
  sometimes be different, or groups of steps packaged under more "civilian"
  names to make the program appear different from that given in the

  7


  "church" of Scientology, but the content has to remain essentially the same.
  To do otherwise would be "squirreling" with the "tech", which was written
  by L. Ron Hubbard, is considered sacred scripture, and if changed in any
  significant way, would no longer be "standard."

  5. A patient at Narconon, by simply believing he is taking a drug treatment
  program, is unwittingly "doing" Scientology. Not as voluntary, extra
  curricular activity, but as mandatory, essential, parts of the treatment itself.
  While other drug treatment programs are often associated with or
  sponsored by religions, none requires that religious practices be
  performed, knowingly or unknowingly, by their patients as part of the
  treatment program itself.

  6. The Narconon program, when not under scrutiny, commonly utilizes
  the E-Meter during the delivery of it's programs. The E-Meter is a
  religious artifact of the Church of Scientology. An E-Meter operator, or
  Auditor, is a minister of the Church of Scientoloy, by their own definition.
  Delivery of at least two of the steps of the Narconon program require the
  services of an Auditor.

  7. The document upon which the core of the Narconon program is based is
  HCOB 6 Feb. 1978RA. It was written by L. Ron Hubbard, Founder, and
  was approved by the Boards of Directors of the Churches of Scientology.
  The final paragraph reads:

  "The Purification Rundown has as its sole purpose the handling of
  the restimulative effects of drugs and toxic residuals on a spiritual
  being. The Purification Rundown is a spiritual activity
  based on and administered according to the doctrine and
  practices of the religion of Scientology as set forth in the
  writings of L. Ron Hubbard and adopted by the Church. No part of
  the rundown is intended as the diagnosis, prescription for, or
  treatment of any bodily or physical condition or ill. The Church is
  not responsible for the handling of any bodily or physical condition
  or ill, it being the responsibility of the individual to seek the
  competent medical advice and treatment of his docto'r in such
  matters." (emphasis added)

  8. Former Narconon staff member Jerry Whitfield was statistician at the
  E1 Paso Narconon. One of the statistics he was to determine each week was
  "How many new Scientologists have we made this week?"

  9. The trademarks and copyrights required by Narconon in order to
  operate its program are owned by the Association For Better Living and

  8


  Education, which is an organization listed on the Church of Scientology
  "Org Board", or organization chart.

  a. The Association For Better Living and Education was created in
  October 1988 by Scientology. Scientologist Sherman D. Lenski
  signed the incorporating document, and the organization's purpose,
  to oversee Narconon's operation, is explained in "The Command
  Channels of Scientology". Prior to this, Narconon's operations were
  the function of the Social Coordination Bureau (or B-l) of the
  infamous Scientology Guardian's Office which was disbanded when
  11 of their top people, including Henning Heldt and Hubbard's wife
  Mary Sue, were sent to prison for breaking in and burglarizing
  government offices.

  b. Narconon was incorporated on May 16, 1970 by Scientology Rev.
  Arthur J. Maren, Scientology Guardian's Officer Henning Heldt, and
  Scientologist William C. Benitez.

  c. Narconon pays ABLE for the use of materials, trademarks, and
  copyrights. Without those materials, trademarks, and copyrights,
  Narconon would cease to exist. It can not change even one word of
  the program or process without violating those agreements.

  D. High Rate of Program Terminations
  More Narconon Units around the United States have been closed down in the past
  20 years than are currently in operation.

  1. Narconon programs have been shut down, or public funding for them
  cut off in many areas of the country over the past two decades:

  a. Los Angeles - 1974 report recommended that State funding not be
  continued due to many flawed aspects of the program including the
  programmatic and theoretical inseparability of the treatment
  program and the religious practices of the "church" of Scientology.

  b. Palo-Alto - ? to 1977 city evaluation reported many deficiencies,
  and a low level of performance. Program was terminated.

  c. Denver - ? to 1980 Narconon program at Lookout Mountain
  School for Boys terminated. Reason unknown.

  d. Connecticut- 9 to 1976
  terminated.

  State Prison Narconon programs

  9


  e. Delaware - 1972 to 1976 - Prison Narconon programs terminated
  when a State Crime Agency study showed Narconon's claims of
  success were False and it's connection with Scientology raised
  questions about the propriety of the program.

  f. Menard County, Illinois - 1970 to 1972 - Short lived Narconon
  program no longer in existence in 1972.

  g. Ionia, Mi. 1976 to 1980 - Narconon programs terminated at
  three Michigan prison facilities following the revelation that the
  program was identical to the "religious" practices of the "church" of
  Scientology, and a prison study concluded that Narconon graduates
  "do not do as well as our (prison) population in general."

  h. St. Cloud, Minn. - 1978 - 1981. Program terminated after prison
  officials uncovered deep connections between the program and the
  "church" of Scientology. Program operated on state and federal
  funding as well as private donations. One who was conned by the
  project was Minn. Senator Rudy Boschwitz, who has confirmed that
  he has relayed his Narconon experiences to Oklahoma Senators
  David Boren and Don Nickles.

  i. E1 Paso, Tx. (no dates was in operation in 1974). Former
  Scientology Sea Org member and Bureau of Indian Affairs employee
  George Baca of Albequerque, New Mexico, was responsible for
  referring Indian patients to this unit. He reports that results were so
  dismal that he not only quit his job with the BIA, but also left
  Scientology. This was the unit where Jerry Whitfield was a staff
  member taking a weekly headcount of new Scientology conversions.
  The unit is not on the current list of active Narconon facilities, but
  the termination date is unknown.

  j. Many others, most of which appear to have been merely telephone
  numbers or referral points, have existed from time to time over the
  years, but now seem to be no longer in operation. Baton Rouge, La.,
  is one such example.

  2. Existing Narconon units in the United States:

  a. A unit near Boston, Mass., which is an outpatient organization run
  by the Church of Scientology.

  b. An outpatient unit in Golden, Co., run by the Church of
  Scientology, and a small unit in Bradenton, FI., which opened just
  this year.

  10


  c. The "mother" unit, a 24 bed facility in Los Angeles.

  d. Several foreign units exist in France, Italy, Sweden, and Spain,
  some of the governments of which are investigating the programs
  for fraud and tax evasion.

    3. The question becomes: If Narconon has the world-wide acceptance they
    claim, and if they truly have a cure rate approaching their claims of 86%,
    why are these Narconon units no longer in operation around the country7
    Are there no more addicts to cure in Minnesota, Michigan, Connecticut,
    Delaware, Illinois, and other places around the country7

    E. Evidence of Mind Control
    There is evidence that Narconon, which utilizes the identical "L. Ron Hubbard
    Technology" as the Church of Scientology, exhibits the same four identifiable
    attributes of Mind Control that are practiced by Scientology and other Mind
    Control cults.

    1. Control of Behavior is instilled early through many of the processes of
    the Training Routines Course, and others, as well as by the structural
    design of the organization itself, through Tone charts, Ethics Conditions,
    and the like. Total, unquestioning obedience is the desired result of these
    early processes.

    2. Control of Thought is instilled primarily through the establishment of a
    new vocabulary in which words are created with automatic thought
    controlling definitions, and common words are assigned new meanings.
    Control of thought is also maintained by the need for acceptance within the
    group, and the restriction of contact with outsiders or other free thinkers.
    Thought Control is also accomplished through the "auditing" process, the
    technical details of which are explained in the Anderson Report to the
    Australian Government under the topic of Hypnosis.

    3. Control of Emotion. A person's emotions are powerful persuaders to
    keep a patient or recruit in line with the goals of the organization. The
    Narconon system is perfect, and so any failure to succeed is the fault of the
    patient. Only the founder and source is perfect, and so anyone else is
    obviously imperfect, and must work harder to become like the leader, or
    fail and face the wrath of expulsion and the impossibility of life without the
    perfect system. Narconon patients, like Scientology recruits, are afraid they
    aren't living up to the perfection expected of them, and are yet afraid to
    leave it.

    11


    4. Control of Information - Read L. Ron Hubbard's works. And not much
    else. After all, why bother reading anything else, when Hubbard has all the
      answers.

      F. Evidence of Cult Characteristics
      Narconon, like its progenitor Scientology, also contains all of the characteristics
      of a classic destructive cult.

      1. Authoritarian, single source - L. Ron Hubbard

      2. Absolute doctrine or belief system - "Standard Tech"

      3. Bi-polar Value system - Theta and Entheta

      4. Hidden agenda, Inner Circle, Protected body of confidential knowledge
      - "Confidential" upper OT levels

      5. Belief that the End justifies the Means, - "Total Freedom" is more
      important than anything it might take to get there, no matter how illegal or
      unethical the action might be, including "Shore Stories", "Acceptable
      Truths", "Change Histories", and other deceptive practices.

      6. Belief that the Group's goals are more important than the Individual -
      "Clearing the Planet for Ron" supersedes family, friends, self.

      7. Strict obedience to superiors and the modeling after the leader - The
      establishment of "Ethics" conditions, the Tone chart, Rehibilitation Project
      Force, and other forms of internal justice and punishment attest to this
      trait. And the whole goal of Scientology is for its members to "follow" Ron
      across the Bridge to Total Freedom.

      8. Offers happiness through good performance in accomplishing the goals
      of the group - "Upstats and Downstats", Production quotas and goals.

      9. Member manipulation through fear and guilt - Fear of being excluded
      from the few who will reach "Total Freedom"; guilt for not accomplishing
      ever increasing production quotas.

      10. Causing grandiose swings between emotional "highs" and "lows" - as
      evidenced by the temporary "Euphoria" upon completion of auditing
      sessions, and the depression that soon follows creating the desire for
      further auditing to ragain the euphoric state.

      12


      11. An elitist mentality - "Scientologists are the top 10% of the top 10% of
      the human race." - LRH. Only Scientologists have the Bridge to Total
      Freedom. Only Scientologists can Clear the Planet.

      12. Changing the person's relationship with his past, present, and future.
      Auditing and the hypnotic state it induces warps an individual's perception
      of his own life, and creates a state in which the person actually believes in
      past lives. See Anderson Report, Hypnosis and Auditing.

      13. Offering no acceptable way to leave the organization - There is no
      acceptable way to leave the organization without having completed the
      "Bridge". One carmot just quit, as is possible in the Lion's Club or Jaycees.
      One who quits becomes an SP, or Suppressive Person and earns the wrath
      of the group for doing so. There are no lukewarm members.

      G. Attitude Toward Legitimate Mental Health Professionals
      The treatment of alcohol and substance abusers is a function of the Mental Health
      Department of the State of Oklahoma, which is responsible for certifying such
      programs as safe and effective for the citizens of the state. As such, the attitude,
      policy, and behavior of Narconon and its progenitor Scientology, toward
      orthodox mental health care and related professions should be noted.

      1. Of mental health professionals, L. Ron Hubbard writes:

      a. "Psychs... have been on the track a long time and are the sole
      cause of decline in this universe .... The universe only seems that way
      to a being because such loathsome psychotics make it seem so. They
      destroyed every great civilization to date and are hard at work on
      this one .... "(HCOB 26 Aug 1982)

      b. "So look well at psychs and anti-religious campaignerS. They are
      speaking from their own blackened souls, and they speak from
      terror... Thus the psychs with their rantings and electric shocks wear
      their own brand clearly marked on them by their own conduct in
      life. Recognize them for what they are; psychotic criminals - and
      handle them accordingly. (HCOB 6 May 1982)

      c. Psychologists and psychiatrists'... "treatments" make the criminals
      more stupid. The stupid commit more crimes... The answer to crime
      is raising IQ. But only the Scientologist can do that. (HCOB 26 April
      1982)

      d. "... psychology and psychiatry... do not achieve ANY good
      results. On the contrary they are destructive beyond belief. They

      13


      make crackpots, sexpots and vegetables when they do not outright
      kill." (HCOB 29 Nov. 1981 )

      e. "... the majority of psychiatrists maim and kill their patients and
      by record, in all history, have only worsened mental conditions ...."
      (HCOB 15 Sept. 1981 )

      f. "The instigators, patrons and supporters of these two subjects
      (psychiatry and psychology) classify fully and demonstrably as
      criminals." (HCOB 29 July 1980)

      g. "Doctors are too often careless and incompetent, psychiatrists are
      simply outright murderers." (HCOB 6 Dec. 1976)

      h. "Our error was in failing to take over total control of all mental
      healing in the West. Well, we'll do that too." (LRH ED 55 INT 29
      Nov. 1968)

      2. This attitude, and subsequent policy towards legitimate mental health
      care stems directly from the author of the Narconon program, who, among
      many other bizarre pronouncements and teachings, said...

      a. he had visited Heaven twice, and found it rather shabby and
      unkept the second time. (HCOB 11 May AD 13) (AD means "after
      Dianetics")

      b. that all of man's problems are caused by the hundreds or
      thousands of dead men's souls (Body Thetans or BTs) that possess his
      body, and that only his teachings can remove these "Body Thetans"
      and thereby relieve man's problems, cure his diseases, and give him
      "Total Freedom". (OT III material and higher)

      3. It is the "Standard Tech" designed by this man, L. Ron Hubbard,
      that the Oklahoma Board of Mental Health is being asked to certify
      as legitimate drug treatment on November 8th. Short of bribery,
      extortion, or stupidity, they cannot, in good faith, do so.

      G. Evidence of Religious or Racial Bigotry Does Not Exist
      As can be seen by reading the above material, those opposing the certification of
      Narconon exhibit no religious or racial bigotry whatsoever, in spite of the
      wailing about descrimination that spews forth from Scientology...

      1. On the contrary, those opposing certification do so on the basis of the
      preservation of religious freedom, contending that the state should not
      enfranchise the establishment of religion as part of a treatment program.

      14


      Them is no opposition whatsoever to the open establishment of the Church
      of Scientology or the practice of Scientology rituals or beliefs as a part of
      their religion. The objection is only to the deceptive inculcation of those
      practices and beliefs into a treatment program we are led to believe is
      secular and independent of the church of Scientology.

      2. There is no evidence whatsoever of racial bigotry exhibited by those
      who object to certification of the program. We object to certification
      because it would constitute fraud upon all those vulnerable people who
      might be lured into the program because it was "state certified", no matter
      whose land it was located on, or what the race, creed, color, handicap, or
      national origin of the people operating it or being "treated" by it.

      15


      NARCONON/SCIENTOLOGY COMPARISON

      The Narconon treatment program is nothing more than the initial steps one
      must take when one is recruited into the "Church" of Scientology. They are
      identical in nature, form, substance, and purpose.

      Progress Charts:
      Scientology: The "Church" of Scientology publishes a chart of "religious"
      progress known as the Bridge To Total Freedom, consisting of many steps. Each
      step up the Bridge is composed of various types of "training" and "processing"
      one must purchase and complete before going to the next step. In addition, there
      are other courses that can be taken at different points during ones travel "up the
      Bridge." Some courses have to be taken or re-taken several times during the trip
      "up the Bridge" if so determined by one's Case Supervisor (read - Scientology
      minister, E-Meter operator, Auditor).

      Narconon: Scientology publishes a chart known as The Narconon Technical
      Line-UP consisting of several steps. Each step up the Narconon Technical Line-
      Up can also be found on the Bridge To Total Freedom religious progress chart of
      the "Church" of Scientology.

      Recruitment:
      The Bridge: People are enticed into Scientology through free introductory
      services including Introductory Lectures, Personality Tests, and Introductory
      Courses.
      Narconon: People are routed into Narconon through Seminars, Lectures,
      Conferences, L. Ron Hubbard Books, Public Relations media promotion,
      advertising, word of mouth, Field Scientology Missions, or referral from social
      boards, parents, counsellors, drug rehab programs, government agencies, etc.
      If one is on drugs at the point of recruitment, one is allowed to "come down"
      through a drug free or "cold turkey" process. If one is currently not physically
      addicted to drugs, one is given a Drug Education/Orientation Lecture concerning
      the Narconon program to follow.

      Step One:
      The Bridge: Step one on the Bridge Chart is called the Purification
      Rundown. On the training side, it contains the Hubbard Professional TR
      (Training Routines) Course which presents Scientology's full theory and
      application of the Communication Cycle, the end result of which is said to be the
      Ability to Confront in (auditing) Session and Life and to Control Communication.
      On the processing side, the Purification Rundown level contains the
      Purification program itself, during which "Biochemical Factors" are audited (a
      Scientology "confessional" process of Abreaction therapy applied by an "Auditor"
      or minister of the "Church" of Scientology, usually done with the aid of an E-
      Meter, an electronic "religious" artifact similar to a galvanometer.) It also
      includes sauna baths and exercises, as well as special vitamin and nutritional
      therapy. The end result is said to be freedom from restimulative effects of drug
      residuals and other toxins.


      Narconon: Step one on the Narconon Technical Line-Up is the Hard TRs (0-
      9) Course, which is said to assist the person to come off drugs on his own volition
      and improve his ability to confront; to give him an understanding of the basics of
      communication and teach him to apply these basics so that he can communicate
      with others effectively.
      These TRs are are identical to those given as training to individuals on the
      Purification Rundown level on the Bridge.
      The next item on the Narconon Technical Line Up is the Purification program
      itself, which is "designed to clean out and purify one's system and free the
      individual from the restimulative effects of drug residuals and other toxins. It
      consists of auditing, sauna baths, exercises, special vitamin and nutritional
      therapy.

      Step Two:
      The Bridge: Level two on the Bridge is called Objectives. On the training
      side, one learns Scientology "Study Tech" resulting in a person who understands
      and applies fully the "Tech of Study."
      On the processing side, the Objectives Course is presented where one
      undergoes auditing on "Objective Processes" which requires the services of a
      Class I or above Auditor (Scientology Minister and E-Meter operator, also
      known as a Case Supervisor -1) and is said to result in giving the person the
      ability to be "in present time and able to control and put order into the
      environment."
      Narconon: Next on the Narconon Technical Line-Up is "Objectives", which
      is called a series of processes that can help bring the person out of past incidents
      and into Present Time with the ability to control and put order into the
      environment. The Objectives program "includes a Narconon C/S-1 (read: Case
      Supervisor-l, or Class I Auditor, or E-Meter operator, or Scientology Minister
      -- all are the same thing)

      Step Three:
      The Bridge: Level three of the Bridge is called the Scientology Drug
      Rundown. On the training side, one will find Scientology Academy Level 0 which
      teaches about "listen style" auditing, memory and communication, and is said to
      leave one with the ability to audit others in lower levels.
      On the processing side, the Scientology Drug Rundown must be completed,
      which consists of auditing "rehabilitation and recall processes addressing drugs."
      This auditing must be done by a Class III or above Auditor (E-Meter operator, or
      minister of the "Church" of Scientology, or Case Supervisor ~ all the same) It is
      said to result in the individual being released from the harmful effects of drugs,
      medicine or alcohol.
      Narconon: Next on the Narconon Technical Line-Up is The (Scientology)
      Drug Rundown, which is a series of counselling actions (read auditing) that can
      release an individual from the harmful effects of drugs, medicine or alcohol.
      This level also requires the services of a Class III Auditor

      Step Four:


      The Bridge: One of the courses that can be taken at any point on the Bridge,
      or as often as the Case Supervisor deems necessary is an auditing process known
      as "The Way To Happiness Rundown." It is based on the booklet "The Way To
      Happiness" by L. Ron Hubbard. Any auditing process, by definition, requires the
      services of a minister of the "Church" of Scientology, and the use of an E-Meter.
      Narconon: Assuming that no "Repair Actions" are needed, the final step on
      the Narconon Technical Line Up is The Way To Happiness Rundown, which
      consists of counselling (read auditing) which is said to help put one on the way to
      happiness.

      What's Next?
      The Bridge: From here the budding Scientologist continues up the Bridge,
      through ARC (Affinity, Reality, Communications) Straightwire, Grade 0, I, II,
      III, IV, NED (New Era Dianetics), Clear, Sunshine Rundown, Solo Auditor
      Course part I, OT (Operating Thetan) Preps, Solo Auditor Course part II, New
      OT I, OT H, OT III, New OT IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, etc to whenever one runs out
      of money or they quit releasing new levels. The highest level on the chart is New
      OT XV, which is not yet released, covers materials said to be confidential, and
      gives one a "confidential" ability.
      Narconon: From here, according to the Narconon Technical Line-Up, the
      budding Scientologist takes the "route to the nearest Org (Scientology
      Organization) for further services if individual so desires." See above paragraph.

      Documentation:
      Copies of "The Bridge to Total Freedom" and "The Narconon Technical Line-
      Up" charts are available on request. Documentation verifying and expanding
      upon all of the training courses and auditing processes included in the Narconon
      program or the levels of Scientology are also available upon request.

      Conclusion:
      Narconon is a recruiting tool for Scientology. A person cannot submit to the
      Narconon program without knowingly or unknowingly becoming subject to
      Scientology dogma and beliefs.
      Narconon portrays itself as a private drug treatment program in order to
      fraudulently benefit from insurance coverage payments, state and federal
      funding, and other programs designed to assist in solving the drug problem,
      while it is in fact processing new recruits for membership in a mind control cult
	that masquerades as a religion.


	Findings of Fact

	regarding the

	Narconon-Chilocco ApplicatiOn

	For Certification

	By The Board of Mental Health, State of Oklahoma

	13 December 1991

	Applicant has filed an application with the proper fees
	attached thereto for certification as a drug and treatment
	facility proposing to use a drug free non-medical
	detoxification modality.

	The applicant requests certification for services to a 75
	bed residential drug and alcohol center.

	The application and supporting documents have been reviewed
	under applicable law and departmental rules and regulations.

	In considering the application for certification the Board
	has carefully considered the evidence presented at the
	hearings of October 18, 1991 and December 13, 1991 on the
	application for certification of Narconon International,
	including the testimony of the witnesses and the exhibits
	presented and received in evidence.

	The Board considered the credibility, demeanor, bias, motive
	and interest of all witnesses in reaching these findings of
	fact.

	The proposed site of the program is located on federal land
	belonging to five tribes and operated by the Chilocco
	Development Authority.

	A long-term lease between Applicant and the Chilocco
	Development Authority is in effect.

	The Development authority and the Applicant have entered
	into a long-term lease agreement wherein the Applicant agrees
	to comply with all the state and federal law including but
	not limited to certification by the Department of Mental
	Health and Substance Abuse Services.

	In reviewing the application and determining the merits of
	the application the Board on the October 18, 1991 and
	December 13, 1991 hearings heard evidence and considered the
	issues of safety and effectiveness of the treatment modality
	utilized by the Applicant.


	Most drugs of abuse are removed from the body by
	detoxification and excretion through the liver, kidneys, and
	the lungs. Although minute quantities of some drugs may be
	found in sweat the amount represents a small fraction of drug
	elimination.

	The Narconon drug treatment modality treats all drug
	addictions the same. No scientific evidence was produced to
	show that all drug addictions are properly treated in the
	same manner.

	The terms "patient," "student" and "client" are used
	interchangeably in these Findings.

	The Narconon Program exposes its patients to the risk of
	delayed withdrawal phenomena such as seizures, delirium
	and/or hallucinations.

	The Board has not considered any evidence of the beliefs or
	opinions of any witness on matters of religion in making its
	findings of fact. To the extent there may be some affiliation
	between Narconon and any religion such affiliation has been
	totally disregarded by the Board. The Board has not made its
	decision on certification based upon any consideration of
	religion or religious affiliation.

	The Board concludes that the Applicant, Narconon
	International, has the burden of proving that its program
	meets all requirements for certification and specifically the
	burden of proving its program is both safe and effective.
	Narconon has not sustained its burden of proving its program
	is either safe or effective. However, regardless of wb~ether
	Narconon International has the burden of proof the Board
	concludes there is substantial credible evidence, as found by
	the Board, that the Narconon Program is unsafe and
	ineffective.

	The Narconon program requires its patients to sweat up to
	five hours per day, seven days a week, for approximately
	thirty days. The rationale, according to Narconon for the
	sweat-out is to rid the body of fat-stored drugs and
	chemicals through sweat. However, there is no scientific
	basis for the technique. Most drugs of abuse are removed from
	the body by detoxification and excretion through the liver,
	kidneys and (in some instances) through the lungs. Although
	minute quantities of some drugs may be found in sweat, the
	amount represents such a small fraction of drug elimination
	that no matter how much an individual sweated through
	exercise or saunas, the clearance of most drugs of abuse
	would not be significantly increased.

	The Narconon program includes the administration of high
	doses of vitamins and minerals to the Narconon patient as
	part of their treatment. The use of high amounts of vitamins

	2


	and minerals in the amounts described administered by
	Narconon can be potentially dangerous to the patients of
	Narconon according to the more credible medical evidence.

	The relationship between drug abuse and psychiatric
	disorders is well established. Most drug abusers who enter
	residential drug treatment facilities have high levels of
	anxiety, depression, hostility or apathy. Further, a chemical
	dependency disorder may co-exist with - or be secondary to -
	a specific psychiatric illness, such as schizophrenia or
	major depression, which should be treated by established
	psychiatric procedures. The Narconon program presents a
	potential risk to the patients of the Narconon program that
	delayed withdrawal phenomena such as seizures, delirium or
	hallucination that are occasionally seen several days after
	cessation of drugs such as benzodiazepines may be
	misinterpreted by Narconon's non-medical staff as the effect
	of mobilizing the drug from fat during the sauna sweat-out
	procedure period. There is also a potential risk that the
	reported re-experience of the abused drugs' effect during the
	sauna sweat-out program may be the result of misinterpreted
	symptoms of hyperthermia or electrolyte imbalance since vital
	signs and serum electrolyte levels have not been consistently
	monitored during the sweat-out procedures or when a smudent
	is reporting the phenomena.

	The progress notes for the patients at Narconon do not
	consistently evidence that vital signs are recorded every six
	hours in the detoxification process; nor do the progress
	notes record fluid intake for detoxification clients.

	Discharge summaries of patients at Narconon were not
	routinely completed within fifteen days of the patient's
	discharge.

	The clinical records of patients at Narconon do not
	consistently reflect the recording of vital signs every six
	hours for clients as required under non-medical
	detoxification standards of the Department.

	There is credible evidence by way of witness testimony and
	review of Narconon charts which reflect that there were
	patients who had psychiatric problems who were taken off of
	their previously prescribed psychiatric medication who did
	not do well and subsequently developed psychiatric problems.
	This evidence indicates a lack of safety and effectiveness in
	connection with the program.
	Clients of Narconon suffering from psychiatric illness, when
	taken off their prescribed medications, did poorly in the
	Narconon program and were placed in a segregated facility
	called Hdestem". This practice endangers the safety, health
	and /or the physical and mental well being of Narconon's
	clients.


	Narconon's program lacks any acceptable degree of quality
	control of the sauna temperatures and treatment. Such a lack
	of control endangers the safety, health and/or the physical
	or mental well being of its clients.

	Narconon hires former students to work at Narconon -
	Chilocco immediately upon graduation and the former students
	work directly with the present students. While former
	patients of drug and alcohol rehabilitation clinics can be
	employed in such clinics after graduation, the former
	patient's recovery from his addiction should be established
	with more passage of time to ensure sobriety and to avoid
	putting patients in contact with addicts who are not fully
	recovered. This practice could negatively impact the safety
	and effectiveness of the program.

	Narconon does not maintain a sufficient level of follow-up
	of its students after graduation, which impacts the
	effectiveness of the program allowing for relapses and lack
	of recovery.

	During an on-site visit in November 1991 a student was found
	with a potentially dangerous low level of potassium which
	could lead to cramps, (muscular, skeletal problems) and
	cardiac arrhythmia.

	The vast majority of time spent in the Narconon treatment
	plan and course work does not in any way relate to or involve
	education about drug and alcohol abuse treatment, issues,
	and/ or addiction. The Narconon treatment plan thus has
	deficiencies which render it ineffective. The Narconon
	treatment plan is general in nature, applies categorically to
	all students and is not individualized. The treatment plan
	also lacks measurable individualized objectives which the
	students should seek to achieve in the program. For instance,
	the treatment plan sets a patient's objective as follows: "To
	have a clear mind." This objective is essentially
	meaningless. In order for a bonafide drug treatment plan to
	be effective it is essential to have individualized measured
	objectives which Narconon's treatment plan lacks.

	Part of the Narconon treatment program involves touch
	assists between patients. Touch assists involve massages
	between patients in rooms by themselves. Narconon has both
	male and female patients who are involved in the drug and
	alcohol rehabilitation program. This practice of touch
	assists could likely lead to improper sexual contact between
	drug addicts or alcoholics in the process of recovery. An
	accepted standard in such programs is for the patients to
	keep their hands to themselves. The practice of touch assists
	between male and female patients who are recovering drug
	addicts or alcoholics in private rooms renders the program
	unsafe in this respect.


	The discharge planning is not adequate and commences only
	very shortly prior to discharge. This lack of discharge
	planning renders Narconon's program ineffective.

	Narconon clients are counseled by Narconon staff that it is
	acceptable for the client to drink alcohol after being
	discharged from the Narconon program and if the client is
	incapable of being able to drink alcohol, then this fact
	evidences the client's need for further treatment. Such
	counseling endangers the client's safety, health and/or the
	physical or mental well being, and is not in accord with
	acceptable drug and alcohol counseling and treatment.

	Narconon employes staff inadequately educated and trained in
	the care and treatment of drug and alcohol abuse clients.
	Such a practice endangers the safety, health and/or the
	physical or mental well being of the clients of Narconon.

	Narconon permits clients under treatment for drug and
	alcohol abuse to handle and provide medications to fellow
	Narconon clients, to supervise the sauna treatment of fellow
	Narconon clients, and to supervise Narconon clients with
	psychiatric disorders. Such practices endanger the client's
	health and safety and are not in accord with acceptable drug
	and alcohol treatment.

	There is substantial medical literature which indicates that
	sauna therapy may pose significant health risks to
	intravenous heroine addicts, which is likely to be treated at
	Narconon, because such drug use may impair normal
	physiological response and problems associa%ed with high
	temperature saunas which could be detected.

	The Narconon Program includes running to stimulate
	circulation followed by prescribed periods in a sauna for up
	to 5 hours at extremely high temperatures (i.e. 135 to 200
	F) and as such endangers the safety, health and/or the
	physical or mental well being of its clients. Such a
	procedure exposes the client to the health hazards of
	dehydration and heat injury. This sauna regime also creates a
	risk of hyperthermia and electrolyte imbalance.

	Narconon restricts access by Narconon clients to their
	personal physicians, family, attorneys, clergy and others by
	not permitting communications except at limited and
	designated hours. such a practice may endanger the physical
	or mental well being of Narconon's clients.

	The Narconon program fails to provide adequate follow-up and
	treatment for Narconon clients demonstrating abnormal lab
	tests and other medical problems. Such failures endanger the
	safety, health and/or the physical or mental well being of
	the Narconon clients and is not in accord with acceptable
	drug and alcohol care and treatment.


	There was no evidence that the Narconon staff inventoried
	and verified the medications brought on to the campus by
	Narconon clients. such a failure endangers the safety, health
	and/or the physical or mental well being of Narconon's
	clients.

	The Board recognizes that Narconon has in the past few weeks
	adopted many new policies. The evidence did not disclose
	adherence to many if not all of these policies. There was no
	measurable and identifiable compliance by Narconon to its
	newly adopted policies in the areas of taking and recordation
	of vital signs, drug and alcohol instructions to clients,
	handling of medications, withdrawal and discharge procedures,
	lab testing, procedures for emergency medical supplies and
	others.

	Narconon clients are routinely administered clonidine.
	Narconon fails to provide adequate supervision for clients
	prescribed this medication given this drug's risks and
	potential for adverse consequences. Such failure to
	adequately supervise endangers the safety, health and/or the
	physical or mental well being of the Narconon clients.

	The vast majority of Narconon's course materials in its drug
	and alcohol abuse program are not designed to educate and/or
	treat clients in the area of drug and alcohol abuse. In
	addition, there was only evidence of occasional lectures to
	Narconon clients in areas of drug and alcohol abuse. As such,
	Narconon's program lacks sufficient instruction and education
	in the area of drug and alcohol abuse.

	There is no credible scientific evidence that the Narconon
	program is effective in the treatment of chemical dependency.

	There is no credible scientific evidence that exercise
	speeds up the detoxification process.

	Large doses of niacin are administered to patients during
	the Narconon program to rid the body of radiation. There is
	no credible scientific evidence that niacin in any way gets
	radiation out of the patient's body. Rather, the more
	credible medical evidence supports the existence of potential
	medical risks to persons receiving high doses of niacin.

	There is no credible evidence establishing the safety of the
	Narconon program to its patients.

	There is no credible evidence establishing the effectiveness
	of the Narconon program to its patients.

	6


	Conclusions Of Law

	Any finding of fact which should be included in the
	conclusion of law such matters are included hereby by
	reference.

	In order for the Application to be granted by the Board it
	must be shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
	program is safe and effective for the non-medical residential
	treatment of alcohol and drug abuse.

	Th purpose of Mental health law in the State of Oklahoma is
	to provide humane care and treatment of persons who require
	treatment for drugs or alcohol abuse. Residents of the State
	of Oklahoma are entitled to medical care and treatment in
	accordance with the highest standards accepted in medical
	1-102.

	The Narconon Chilocco program does not conform to the
	principles of traditional chemical dependency treatment. The
	Board's conclusion that the Narconon Chilocco program is non-
	traditional does not form the basis, in any respect, for the
	Board's decision on the Narconon application for
	certification.

	No scientifically well-controlled studies were found that
	documented the safety of the Narconon program. There are
	potential dangers from the use of non-medical staff who may
	be unable to interpret the possibility of seizures,
	delirious, cardiac arrythmia, or hallucinations that are
	phenomena associated with the cessation of drugs. There is
	also a potential risk of the reported reexperience of the
	abused drug effect during the sauna sweat out program may be
	the result of misinterpreted symptoms of hyperthermia or
	electrolyte imbalance. Moreover, the multiple findings of
	fact heretofore entered by the Board establish that
	Narconon's program is not safe.

	Drug treatment program offered by Narconon Chilocco is an
	experimental treatment and not proven safe or effective and
	is not in accord with the highest standards accepted in
	medical practice as required by statute.

	No scientifically well-controlled independent, long-term
	outcome studies were found that directly and clearly
	establish the effectiveness of the Narconon program for the
	treatment of chemical dependency and the more credible
	evidence establishes Narconon's program is not effective. The
	Board determines that the Narconon Program is not effective
	in the treatment of chemical dependency.

	The Board concludes that the program offered by Narconon
	Chilocco is not medically safe.

	7


	The Board has reviewed the proposed findings of fact and
	conclusions of law submitted by the Department and Narconon.
	Any proposed finding of fact and/or conclusion of law
	inconsistent with those entered by the Board is denied.

	Certification is denied.

	-30-

	NOTE: For confirmation of the authenticity of the contents
	of this document, please contact:

	Mr. Guy Hurst
	Attorney General's Office
	2300 N. Lincoln Blvd, Suite 112
	Oklahoma City, OK 73105-4894
	Phone 1 521-4274


	The Narconon

	Drug Treatment Program

	1. According to "The Narconon Technical Line-Up", a Narconon publication, the
	Narconon drug treatment program consists of several steps: DetoxificationANithdrawal,
	Drug Education/Orientation Lecture, Hard Trs (0-9) Course, Purification Program,
	Objectives, The Drug Rundown, and The Way To Happiness Rundown.

	2. The Narconon program was explained by Mr. Leroy Bridges of the State Mental
	Health Department as "standard drug treatment and counseling, with the addition
	of sauna, for which we have 'no feel"'.

	3. The following pages explain in a little more detail each step of the Narconon
	program. We ask that you read them over to determine for yourself it they are "standard
	drug treatment and counseling"

	4. Please refer to: The Narconon Technical Line-Up, the Bridge To Total Freedom, and
	the Narconon course materials package.


	2

	Detoxification/Withdrawal

	Drug Education/Orientation Lecture

	1. Detoxification/Withdrawal - this appears to be the "standard" part. It reportedly
	consists of cold turkey withdrawal, with considerable personal attention while a person
	is undergoing the stress of withdrawal. For persons medically approved for such
	withdrawal, we have no objections or complaints about this part of the program.

	2. Drug Education/Orientation Lecture - Once a person is "down", the rest of the
	program begins with this lecture. On it's surface we find nothing objectionable with a
	lecture on the evils of drugs. The lecture is supposed to also provide full orientation to
	the rest of the Narconon Program.

	3. The above two steps are the only steps in the Narconon Program that do not also
	appear on "The Bridge To Total Freedom." The Bridge is the chart of religious progress of
	the Church of Scientology.


	3

	2

	Hard TRs

	1. Hard TRs (0-9) Course - Training Routines based on Hubbard Communications
	Bulletin of 11 June 1967, Reissued 12 May 1972. (Copy enclosed) The TR Course is
	listed on the first level of the Scientology Bridge To Total Freedom, under the heading of
	"Course"

	2. Hard TRs consists of several repetitive drills. Professional Psychologists (names on
	request) familiar with the drills, as well as many former Scientologists, Narconon
	volunteer workers from the Church of Scientology, and Narconon patients with whom we
	have spoken say the drills are "numbing" or "hypnotic", due to the length and constant
	repitition employed during the drills.

	3. TRs are required first steps "up the Bridge" into Scientology. They are also required
	in the Narconon program. "Hard" TR's and TR's are essentially the same, the only
	difference is in their application. For instance, TR-0 requires the patient to stare at the
	counselor, while Hard TR-0 requires that the patient also not blink during the period.

	4. The TRs are found in the Narconon course book 1, entitled "Therapeutic TR Course;
	and again repeated entirely and exactly in the Narconon course book 4a entitled
	"Communication & Perception Course."


	4

	Exhibit 3

	Purification Program

	1. Purification Program - A procedure based on Hubbard Communications Office
	Bulletin of 6 February 1978RA, Revised 16 March 1978, Re-Revised 4 December
	1979. (Copy enclosed) The Purification Rundown is listed on the first level of the
	Scientology Bridge To Total Freedom, under the heading of "PC Grade".

	2. The Purification Program is the "exercise, sauna, vitamin, and nutrition" part of
	Narconon's treatment program. The document outlining the program says "The
	Purification rundown is a spiritual activity based on and administered
	according to the doctrine and practices of the religion of Scientology..."

	This process "correctly belongs to the field of spiritual and religious healing, not in
	the field of medicine..." according to an article in "Scientology Today" (c Jan 1989).

	This reasoning, in fact, was the basis of Scientology's defense against charges of
	practicing medicine without a license in Italy.

	How, we wonder, can it be construed as religious practice in one place, and secular
	treatment in another?

	3. The Purification Rundown appears to be replete with faulty logic, half truths, total
	absurdities, and miraculous statements for which no supporting data are available.

	It has been reviewed by Dr. Hogg, M.D., of Ontario, Canada, Dr. Bruce Roe, Professor of
	Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Oklahoma, and by Dr. Mark Palmer,
	M.D., of Ponca City, Oklahoma. The opinions of Dr Roe and Dr. Palmer are included, and
	speak for themselves. Opinions were rendered on this material by several other
	Professors at the Universy of Oklahoma on the KOCO-TV special report.

	The only attempt at independent (non-Scientology) research on the Purification
	Rundown that we have been able to uncover was proposed by Dr. Joseph Miceli, Associate
	Professor of Pediatrics and Pharmacology at Children's Hospital of Michigan in June of
	1985. The Miceli research proposal suggested that the process might indeed be of some
	benefit in removing toxins (PBBs and PCBs) from the human system, but not for any of
	the reasons proposed by it's originator, Mr. L. Ron Hubbard,

	The Miceli study was turned down by the Human Subject Review Committee as
	unacceptable for use on human subjects, according to Dr. Doug Spathelf, Research
	Director of Michigan Central University, and Dr. Danial Graf, Research Director and
	Chairman of the Human Subject Review Committee of Wayne State University. The
	research project, if approved, would have been a joint venture of Central Michigan,
	Wayne State, and Children's Hospital of Michigan.

	Yet this is the program the Oklahoma Department of Mental Health is being asked to
	certify as approved for use in the State of Oklahoma.


	4

	5

	Objectives

	1. Has consisted of a number of different Scientology processes over the years. A list of
	the processes which Narconon currently delivers under the rubric "Objectives" is not
	readily available, but almost certainly includes many of those described in the enclosed
	copy of a portion of HCOB 14 Nov. 1987 "Expanded Grade 1 Process Checklist,"
	according to former members.

	2. "Objectives" is found on the "Bridge To Total Freedom" religious progress chart
	under the heading of "PC Grade" as the second step up the "Bridge". It requires a "Class I
	or above Auditor". An Auditor is an E-meter operator, who must be, by definition, a
	minister in the Church of Scientology.

	3. "Objectives" training is found in the Narconon course book 4b entitled
	Communication & Perception Course.


	6

	Exhibit 5

	Drug Rundown

	1. Data not available on the content of this step of the program.

	2. The "Drug Rundown" is found on the "Bridge To Total Freedom" religious progress
	chart under the heading of "PC Grade" as the third step up the "Bridge". It requires a
	"Class III or above Auditor". An Auditor is an E-meter operator, who must be a minister
	in the Church of Scientology.

	3. Former patients at Narconon-Chilocco have confirmed that the Drug Rundown is not
	given at the Chilocco location, but that patients are encouraged to "go to Los Angeles" to
	receive that portion of the program following completion of the rest of the course at
	Chilocco. There is no course material for the Drug Rundown in the Narconon package of
	materials sold to Narconon patients at Chilocco.


	7
	Exhibit 6

	Happiness Rundown

	1. Auditing (religious practice involving E-meter and minister of the Church of
	Scientology) based on the booklet, "The Way To Happiness" by L. Ron Hubbard. It is
	described as "moral pastoral counseling".

	2. The Happiness Rundown is a program which can be run "as recommended by the case
	supervisor" anytime during ones ascent up the "Bridge To Total Freedom", and probably
	as often as is deemed necessary. Description of the Happiness Rundown is located on the
	Bridge religious progress chart among many other offerings above the Free Introductory
	services line, but below the first level of the Bridge. (look under Purification Rundown
	on the greatly reduced chart previously mailed.

	3. "The Way To Happiness" booklet is provided to all Narconon students.

	4. Almost half of he Narconon course material contains precepts of the religion of
	Scientology regarding their view of acceptable behavior, morals, morays, and ethics.
	These are found in Narconon course books 5 thru 7 entitled "Ups & Downs in Life
	Course", Personal Values and Integrity Course", and "Changing Conditions in Life
	Course."

	Most of this material is innocuous common sense. But the courses also subtly introduce
	Scientology's unique stereotypes of Social and Anti-Social people; Suppressive Persons;
	Potential Trouble Sources; and Disconnection, as defined and utilized in the religion of
	Scientology.

	The material also explains morality and ethical behaviour in Scientology's religious
	terms. ie: Survival along the Eight Dynamics and Confession of Overts (Sins) and
	Withholds (Sins of omission), This material suggests that the End justifies the Means;
	that whatever causes "the greatest good for the greatest number of dynamics" is moral
	and ethical behaviour.


	8

	Conclusion

	1. Although they were promised to several individuals who have asked for them,
	Narconon has not delivered any "treatment protocols". The material reviewed herein has
	been provided to us by former members of the Church of Scientology and former
	Narconon patients who have taken the course. They tell us there is simply no difference
	between the Narconon program and the Scientology religious program, except that
	insurance will usually pay if one goes through Narconon, while the individual himself
	must pay if he goes directly through the Church of Scientology.

	2. By taking the Narconon program, it should be quite obvious that one is automatically
	taking the first steps "up the Bridge" to Scientology, probably even without realizing it.

	If a person doesn't take the prescribed steps, he fails the program. A person simply
	cannot seriously undergo this program without becoming a Scientologist, otherwise
	failure is the automatic result. Therefore, in order to become successfully drug free
	under Narconon's treatment, one must become a Scientologist. For these reasons, we
	believe Narconon to be a recruitment tool for the Church of Scientology.

	3. Completing, or passing the program or its various steps is also an interesting
	procedure: As it says in paragraph 2 of HCOB 14 Nov 1987..."Each process is run to F/N
	(Floating Needle on the E-meter), cognition (the point at where the patient believes it is
	complete), VGIs (the patient has Very Good Intentions), and Release (says he feels he has
	passed this part of the program)... etc.

	In other words, a patient is cured when he thinks he is, and can convince the
	Scientology minister operating the E-meter (if one is being used) that he has good
	intentions. No objective scientific testing is used.

	Once a patient attains a state of "release" (thinks he is cured) he must "attest" in order
	to obtain a Certificate of Completion. The patient simply writes down that he has achieved
	the EP (End Phenomena) or promised result of the course. Attesting is simply a method
	used by the Church of Scientology to collect an unlimited number of immediate
	testimonials praising their product, which they then use in their public relations effort.

	Much of the Narconon program is common sense, simplistically applied, and if not
	beneficial, at least is not harmful. The balance is an insidious inculcation of the tenents
	of a religion into what is supposed to be a secular "scientific" treatment program for
	addiction, the effectiveness and safety of which has never been established to begin with.
	Narconon does not deserve certification by the state, and at absolute best should be
	allowed to exist and be advertised only as a religious program of the Church of
	Scientology for the spiritual treatment of drug abuse.


	Presentation at the Mental Health Department Public Hearing
	On The Certification of Narconon
	Within The State Of Oklahoma
	09 October, 1990

	by Robert W. Lobsinger
	Publisher, Newkirk Herald Journal

	I. Destructive Religious Mind Control Cult

	It is our studied opinion that:

	Narconon is a recruiting front for the Church of Scientology. The often stated
	goal of the Church of Scientology is the worldwide expansion of "LRH Tech"
	through all possible and available means. Narconon's drug treatment program is
	simply an exploitable method of accomplishing that end.

	The Church of Scientology is an authoritarian, paramilitary, destructive,
	religious mind control cult.

	Scientology is a Church, because it chooses at times to call itself a religion. It
	has that right in America.
	It has, in some cases, modified it's activity and financial practices such that it
	sometimes qualifies for the tax exempt status afforded religions by the federal
	government, which is not concerned so much with it's spirituality or lack of it as
	it is with it's behavior.
	But like a chameleon, where it is inconvenient to be a religion, such as in Israel,
	Scientology has seen fit to become a Philosophical Society. Only the title changes,
	the "Tech" remains "Standard," and the goal remains the same: To Clear the
	Planet for Ron.
	The cult is not a "Turn The Other Cheek Religion," as Scientology Rev. and
	Narconon incorporator Rev. Arther Maren once put it. Members are drilled in
	the devious, and trained in methods of unreasonableness in order to defend the
	indefensible.
	Consequently, when the historical truth and documented facts about Scientology
	are brought to light, they attack the messenger personally and attempt to discredit


	him in any way possible. Questions receive non-sequitor answers. Scientologists
	believe the end justifies the means. Scientologists believe not that truth is
	absolute, but that Truth is what is True for them.
	Scientology has other attributes as well. It is authoritarian and paramilitary in
	structure and behavior; it condones policies such as "Disconnect" and "Fair
	Game" that are clearly destructive, and its high pressure sales of an unending
	array of religious services tends to impoverish its members. Scientology also
	exhibits the four identifiable attributes of mind control, as well as 13
	characteristics common to destructive cults of all kinds, be they religious,
	political, psychotherapy/educational, or commerciall. Scientology is, in fact, such
	a complex organism that it encompasses some of the attributes of each of those
	types of cult.
	But it chooses to call itself a religion. A religion which teaches in its
	"confidential upper levels" that all of mans problems are due to the hundreds, and
	maybe thousands of dead men's souls that possess his body, called Body Thetans,
	or BT's. It's a fact they deny vigorously, but never the less, a fact that was
	released in one of their many court cases of the past.
	And so, be it a religion that borders on demonology, it is a religion. And it is
	in that context that we will examine the relationship of Scientology with the
	Narconon "drug treatment" program it created when the Scientology "Rev."
	Arthur J. Maren, Scientology Guardian's Officer Henning Heldt, and
	Scientologist William C. Benitez signed their names as founding directors on May
	16, 1970.

	II. Clearing The Planet

	To the Church of Scientology, expansion is everything. Clearing the Planet for
	Ron is the ultimate advertised goal. The most logical method of proselytizing is
	the establishment of churches and missions around the world to carry the message
	to the nonbelievers, like many other religions do.
	And Scientology does this.
	Walk into the front door of the Church of Scientology, sign up, and put your
	money down. You'll find yourself taking religious training and processing
	courses such as the Happiness Rundown, the TR Course, the Purification
	Rundown, Objectives, and the Drug Rundown. Some of them are bulk-packaged
	as a "Communications" course. Then you'll go on to an unending assortment of
	other higher levels of religious processing and training, ultimately taking you all

	2


	the way across the "Bridge to Total Freedom," at a cost now conservatively
	estimated at over $300,000.00 per person.
	Scientology reaches for new members this way, just like other religions. But the
	process is apparently too slow and tedious for an organization with the utopian
	answer to everything, and which offers Total Freedom in exchange for mere
	money.
	The solution is the establishment of "front" organizations that target specific
	groups of individuals. Scientology is perfect. It has all the answers. Find out what
	problems a group has, and offer the Scientology solution. It's usually not even
	necessary to mention that the Church of Scientology is involved.
	"You got stage fright? We have the Communications Course available at the
	Celebrity Center."
	"You can't manage your business? Welcome to Sterling Management
	Consultants, where we start you off with the Communications Course."
	"You doing poorly in school? Why not take the Communications Course at
	Delphi School."
	"You got a drug problem? At Narconon, our Communications Course will help
	you learn how to say no to pushers."
	There are many, many others, but Narconon is our immediate concern.

	III. The Narconon Front

	Narconon is just one of the many "front" organizations of the Church of
	Scientology designed to "expand LRH Tech generally into society."
	At its inception, Narconon was operated as a function of the Social Coordination
	Office (B-6) of the infamous Scientology Guardian's Office. After several top
	Scientologists in the Guardian's Office (including L. Ron Hubbard's wife Mary
	Sue and Narconon Founding Director Henning Heldt) were sent to prison for
	burglarizing government offices, the name was changed to the Office of Special
	Affairs. The Social Coordination Office continued to operate under OSA just as it
	had under the GO. By this time it not only ran the Narconon front, but also other
	fronts known as Criminon, Delphi School, and Applied Scholastics.
	In October 1988, Scientology created the Association for Better Living and
	Education. Sherman D. Lenski signed the incorporating document. ABLE is
	currently a Scientology unit appearing on "The Command Chart of Scientology"
	or "Org Board."
	According to "The Command Channels of Scientology", a publication designed
	to explain the "Org Board", Narconon is now an ABLE responsibility, as are


	several other front organizations including Applied Scholastics, The Way To
	Happiness Foundation, and Criminon. ABLE also owns the Trademarks and
	Copyrights to the processes and materials needed by Narconon to operate.
	Narconon is owned by ABLE, and ABLE is owned by the Church of
	Scientology.

	Never has the purpose of Narconon been more graphically portrayed than in the
	1974 issue of Narconon News, Volume 6, Issue 3. (see photocopy exhibit)
	"Narconon helps get people up RON"S bridge to FREEDOM," says the front
	page. The illustration clearly shows that "Narconon is the bridge to the Bridge"
	to Total Freedom. See the "Narconon" sign on the first bridge leading directly to
	the second bridge? See the sign on the second bridge? "This Way To Total
	Freedom"
	Lets take a look at the Scientology religious progress chart known as "The
	Bridge to Total Freedom"2, represented by that second bridge:
	Down near the bottom, in fine print, is the "Happiness Rundown" based on the
	L. Ron Hubbard booklet, "The Way To Happiness".
	Just above it on the Processing side of the chart is the "Purification Rundown"
	in which Biochemical Factors are "audited" by an E-Meter operator (minister) of
	the Church of Scientology. The result is supposed to be "Freedom from
	restimulative effects of Drug Residuals and other Toxins"
	Near the left, on the Training side on the same line is the Hubbard Professional
	TR Course. This is a part of the amalgam sold by fronts as the "Communications
	Course." It promises "ability to confront in session and life and to control
	communication."
	Again on the Processing side, above the Purification program is "Objectives,"
	which requires a Class 1 or above Auditor (Scientology Minister - E-meter
	operator) to deliver. It promises the ability to be in present time and to control
	and put order into the environment.
	Above that is the Drug Rundown, also requiring a Scientology minister, Class
	III or above. It promises that the individual will be released from the harmful
	effects of drugs, medicine or alcohol.
	Next, a person continues up this religious Bridge through 28 more levels
	toward Total Freedom, some of which have not been released yet, and many of
	which are marked "confidential."
	That's directly off of the Religious Progress Chart of the Church of Scientology
	known as "The Bridge To Total Freedom."

	4


	Now, let's look at the Narconon Technical Line-Up Chart3:
	What do we find here?
	A patient arrives at Narconon after being referred there from somewhere else,
	probably LRH Books, advertising, or word of mouth.
	If he is high on drugs, he is allowed to come down cold turkey during the
	Detoxification/Withdrawal step.
	Then he receives a Drug Education/Orientation lecture.
	And what do we find next?
	We find the TR Course (part of the amalgam sold as the Communications
	Course) right off the religious progress chart.
	We find the Purification program, right off the religious progress chart.
	We find the Objectives program, right off the religious progress chart.
	We find the Drug Rundown, right off the religious progress chart.
	And, we find the Happiness Rundown. Again, right off the religious progress
	chart.
	Finally, the direction arrow that takes us through the Narconon Technical Line-
	Up points us to the "nearest (Church of Scientology) Org for further services..."

	IV. Religious Rituals

	Can there be any question but that Narconon is a recruiting agency for the
	Church of Scientology? Can there be any question but that the steps on the
	Narconon Technical Line-Up are actually Scientology religious rituals taken
	directly from the core of Church beliefs?

	Scientology's own documents prove that it is!

	Central to the drug treatment portion of the Narconon Technical Line-Up is the
	Purification program. The document upon which the Purification program is
	based is HCO Bulletin of 6 February 1978RA, Revised 16 March 1978, Re-
	revised 4 December 1979. Prior to this refinement, something called the "Sweat
	Box" was in use for the same purpose.
	This document was written by L. Ron Hubbard, Founder, and was approved by
	the Boards of Directors of the Churches of Scientology. It is the basis of the
	recently released (1990) Scientology book "Clear Body, Clear Mind" being falsly
	advertised as a "new" book by L. Ron Hubbard, who died in 1986.
	The final paragraph in this document reads as follows:

	5


	"The Purification Rundown has as its sole purpose the
	handling of the restimulative effects of drugs and toxic
	residuals on a spiritual being. The Purification
	Rundown is a spiritual activity based on and
	administered according to the doctrine and practices
	of the religion of Scientology as set forth in the writings
	of L. Ron Hubbard and adopted by the Church. No part of the
	rundown is intended as the diagnosis, prescription for, or
	treatment of any bodily or physical condition or ill. The
	Church is not responsible for the handling of any bodily or
	physical condition or ill, it being the responsibility of the
	individual to seek the competent medical advice and treatment
	of his doctor in such matters." (emphasis added)

	The medical and scientific community around the state and nation tend to agree
	with this disclaimer. At any rate, they are quite certain the program does not
	qualify as medicine or science:

	Of the document, Dr. Everett R. Rhoades, M.D., Assistant Surgeon General of
	the Indian Health Service, Public Health Service, Department of Health and
	Human Services said, "...the 'Purification Rundown' concept cannot be considered
	medically sound."

	Said Dr. William B. Svoboda, M.D., (Pediatric and Adolescent Neurology and
	Epileptology, Wichita, Ks.) of the Purification Rundown document: "...
	Hubbard's theories in general are just that... theories without controlled proof. He
	flings facts around wildly in excess... to drown the readers in facts in order to
	convince them that he knows..."

	Dr. Mark Palmer, M.D., Internal Medicine, Ponca City, says: "I think it is fair
	to say that the Purification Rundown is without merit," and further, "In general,
	it appears to me that the overall program being advocated by Narconon is nothing
	more than a poorly disguised program for obtaining recruits into the Church of
	Scientology..."

	According to Dr. Bruce Roe, Ph.D., Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
	University of Oklahoma, Norman: "Overall the program proposed by Mr.
	Hubbard is pure unadulterated 'cowpies'. It is filled with some scientific truth,

	6


	but mainly is illogical and the conclusions drawn by Mr. Hubbard are without any
	basis in scientific fact..."

	Of Narconon's progenitor, Dr. Louis Jolyon West, M.D., Professor of
	Psychiatry, University of California, Los Angeles, says: Scientology is an
	insidious and dangerous cult. Its founder, L. Ron Hubbard, was a science-fiction
	writer whose career as a mental healer was founded on extravagant lies and
	deception."

	Dr. David Hogg, M.D., Toronto, Canada: "In summary, Hubbard is a very
	ignorant man. He consistently demonstrates a complete and at times dangerous
	lack of knowledge concerning biochemistry, physics, and medicine. His theories
	are based on fallacies and lies; there is no scientific data to support any of them...
	His program not only fails to deliver what it promises but may actually be
	detrimental to the health of those taking it."

	Former U.S. Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, as a member of the National
	Coalition Against Health Fraud, has criticized the "Purification Program" or
	"Hubbard Method" which is central to the Narconon program. Specifically, he
	opposed it's promotion in the book "Diet for a Poisoned Planet" by David
	Steinman, published by Harmony Books, which carried the suggestion by James
	Marcus (a known Scientologist) of the EPA that people should undertake the
	program at a Scientology clinic in California known as HealthMed. Scientology,
	of course, was not mentioned in the book, and Dr. Marcus leaves the impression
	that the program is approved by the EPA. Mr. Marcus has been involved in
	previous such implications in the past, one involving his recommendation that
	firemen in Shreeveport LA be treated at HealthMed after being exposed to a PCB
	fire. After paying over $100,000.00, the city of Shreeveport hired independent
	experts to evaluate the program, and consequently terminated it as useless.

	Dr. Robert E. Geary, D.D.S., past member 648 Mental Health Board of Medina
	County, OH, who underwent the Purification program himself says, "As a health
	care practitioner that has participated in their so-called Purification rundown,
	which is the basis for Narconon's treatment program, I would say it is bunk." and
	further, "Following my wife's purification program, she began having difficulty
	sleeping, having hallucinations and other bizarre symptoms which the
	Scientologists told her were normal. She eventually required hospitalization... I
	consider their treatment to be unscientific and dangerous."


	The Tennant evaluation of Narconon New Life in Los Angeles, issued by Dr.
	Forest S. Tennant, Jr., M.D., P.H., et al, to the California State Health
	Department in 1974 said among many other things: "In the case of Narconon
	New Life, there was adequate indication that public money is being used for
	purposes other than drug rehabilitation... Our evaluation indicates such an
	inseparable programmatic and theoretical relationship between Narconon and the
	Church of Scientology that specifically religious practices are commonly used in
	the treatment of clients within the Narconon New Life program. Such practices
	include E-Meter auditing by ministers of the Church of Scientology and the use
	of educational material and organizational theory adopted from Church of
	Scientology writings by L. Ron Hubbard..."

	The only independent (non-scientology) proposal we have been able to find
	designed to research the effectiveness of the Purification Rundown was made by
	Dr. Joseph Miceli, Associate Professor of Pediatrics and Pharmacology at
	Children's Hospital of Michigan in 1985. This proposal suggested that the method
	might actually be somewhat effective in removing toxins (PBBs and PCBs) from
	the human system - although not for any of the reasons given by the program's
	author, L. Ron Hubbard. The study was to be done jointly by Central Michigan
	University and Wayne State University School of Medicine.
	However, the study was turned down by the Human Subject Review Committee,
	which found the program unsafe for use on humans, according to Dr. Doug
	Spathelf research director at CMU and Dr. Danial Graf, research director at
	WSU and chairman of the Human Subject Review Committee.

	What meager material Scientology has presented in defense of it's Narconon
	program as a scientific and medically sound program consists of enthusiastic
	testimonials printed in a few magazines and obscure medical journals. It is
	interesting to note that they all quote the work done by the Foundation for
	Advancements in Science and Education (FASE). FASE is another of
	Scientology's front organizations designed to give ligitimacy to the others. It was
	incorporated November 27, 1981 by Scientologists Steven R. Heard and Jack
	Dirmann for the expressed purpose of researching the efficacy of and promoting
	"the use of the works of L. Ron Hubbard." Hardly independent scientific study.

	Even though L. Ron Hubbard is the sole author of all Scientology and Narconon
	programs, in over 30 years of writing, he never produced a single piece of work
	which meets acceptable, independent, scientific criteria.4


	A former Scientologist and E1 Paso Narconon staffer told me just yesterday by
	telephone that one of his duties each week was to keep the "Stats". One of the
	statistics he was required to keep track of was the number of new Scientologists
	made during each week. He added that his fantastic "cure rate" of over 80% was
	the result of 6 voluntary responses from a total of 20 questionairs mailed to
	former prisoners who had taken the Narconon course. Other former
	Scientologists who have staffed Narconon facilities in the past have told me in
	person that the training and processing performed at Narconon units is identical
	to that given at Churches of Scientology. (Names available on request.)

	And finally, an Italian Court in Bolzano, Italy determined on January 23, 1989
	that the Purification Rundown represented a practice that correctly belongs to the
	field of spiritual and religious healing, not in the field of medicine. The ruling
	was announced in Scientology Today, a publication whose stated purpose is to
	make the environment safe for Scientology expansion.5

	V. Conclusion:

	Narconon is a recruiting front for the Church of Scientology. The individual
	steps of Narconon's program, and particularly the Purification portion, come
	directly from the core content of Scientology's religious progress chart known as
	the Bridge to Total Freedom.
	According to Scientology's own material, they are spiritual or religious
	practices, not intended to serve any medical or physical function.
	The Scientology publication, "Scientology Today," even praised an Italian
	judge's decision determining that the Purification program was religious in
	nature.
	Non-Scientology-related independent medical and scientific experts have
	reviewed the material and find it medically and scientifically valueless.

	When Church of Scientology documents and publications say that Narconon
	procedures are strictly spiritual in nature, and when scientific and medical
	experts conclude that the procedures are neither scientifically nor medically
	acceptable, there is only one conclusion that can be drawn:
	Narconon is a religious entity engaged in religious activity and not certifiable
	by the Mental Health Department of Oklahoma.

	9


	Certification of Narconon as a legitimate drug treatment program must be
	denied.
