BEFORE ME,  personally appeared JESSE PRINCE,   who, after being duly sworn,
deposes and says:
1. I am over 18 years of age and currently reside in the state of Illinois,
Cook County. This declaration is of my own personal knowledge and if called
upon to testify to the facts herein I could and would be competently able to
testify thereto.

My History in Scientology

 2.	I was in Scientology for 16 years (1976-92). In July of 1992,  I
escaped with my wife from Scientology headquarters at Gilman Hotsprings, Ca.
Under duress, my wife and I were forced to return. After intense interrogation
and isolation, my wife and I on October 31, 1992, were able to leave
Scientology, but only after we were coerced to sign a release containing
untrue statements protecting Scientology from legal liability. I remained
silent about my experience in Scientology, since upon leaving I was subjected
to routine monitoring by Mike Sutter  of the  Religious Technology Center,
(RTC),  and Earl Cooley, Scientology counsel. In  July of 1998,  I discovered
that others had similar experiences and were courageous enough to speak out
against Scientology.  I therefore ended my  silence so that others would know
about the truth of what really happens within the inner circles of
Scientology.

2. I am intimately familiar with the organization, movement, beliefs,
practices and technologies of Scientology. I served in the highest ranks of
Scientology, including  second in command of the Religious Technology Center
(RTC), the most senior body of Scientology.  

3. Beginning in March of 1983 and until the Spring of 1987, I held the
position of "Deputy Inspector General, External".   In this position, I was
one of three members of the Board of Directors of RTC while David Miscavige
was on its Board of Trustees. 

4. In the position of "Deputy Inspector General, External", I was in charge of
supervising all activities in every aspect  of Scientology, i.e., supervising
senior management structure of the "mother church", Church of Scientology
International, CSI. In the hierarchy of all of Scientology, I was only two
steps removed from L. Ron Hubbard.  Mr. Hubbard gave his orders to David
Miscavige who in turn gave them  to me to supervise, delegate and enforce
their execution. Corporately speaking, Vicki Aznaran, the President of RTC,
and I were accountable and reported  only to David Miscavige and L. Ron
Hubbard.  RTC gave CSI the license  to use Dianetics and Scientology
technologies. 

 5. Moreover, I was in charge of theTrademark Integrity Secretary, (TMI Sec),
Jim Mooney, who had authority over the senior management of CSI called the
Watchdog Committee. This Committee has complete authority over the different
sectors of all of Scientology. The members of this committee are comprised of
senior management officials who oversee and control the management of the
following: FLAG SERVICE ORGANIZATION,(FSO); World Institute of Scientology
Enterprises, (WISE); Scientology Missions International,(SMI); Reserves, the
person responsible for the management and supervision of all bank accounts and
revenues; Golden Era Productions, (GOLD);Flag Land Base,(FLB); Sea Org, (SO);
Celebrity Center International, (CCInt); and Office of Special Affairs, (OSA),
which handles all the legal and intelligence functions of Scientology.

7.	Some of my specific duties as Deputy Inspector General, External,
included supervising all litigation by or against any Scientology
organization, intelligence and covert operations brought against perceived or
imagined "enemies", trademark registrations, and the licensing of trademarks
to other Scientology corporations to create the false impression of
"corporate integrity".  I was also in charge of the "Celeb Project," which ran
all auditing of Scientology celebrities, such as John Travolta, Priscilla
Presley, Kirstie Alley, Anne Archer, and Chick Corea to name a few.  I was
also the auditor for David Miscavige and his wife, Shelly.  I was the course
instructor for all of the auditing courses for Alain Kartuzinski and his
Cramming Officer for Class 10, 11, and 12, 12 being the highest level an
auditor can reach.

 6. I first became involved with Scientology in September, 1976, in San
Francisco.  In  late 1976, I joined the elite Scientology paramilitary
organization known as the Sea Organization, also known as the "Sea Org" or the
acronym "SO".  Sea Organization personnel are authorized to take over and
control Scientology organizations and to demote or promote personnel including
chief executives, move bank accounts, and run the corporation as if  SO
personnel were employees or representatives of that  corporation.  The power
of the SO is  not only over the purported religious Scientology organizations
but also prevails over the secular organizations such as WISE or Bridge
Publications. The Sea Org's pervasive authority is possible because the only
personnel allowed into executive positions in these organizations are those
who are in full agreement that the Sea Organization is the commanding
organization.  

7. Before I was recruited into the Religious Technology Center (RTC) in 1982,
most of my experience was with Scientology technical material; the actual
codified auditing and administrative  techniques used within the organization.
This gave me considerable time to become familiar with these technical
materials, most of which was written by Scientology founder L.  Ron Hubbard.
My knowlege and expertise of the technologies prompted my promotion to a
technical position at RTC. 

8. In the fall of 1982, L. Ron Hubbard issued an order to find the best
Supervisor/Cramming Officer in all of Scientology and bring that person to
Golden Era Productions (GOLD) to correct and train the senior executive
management structure of the Scientology empire all around the world.  A
Supervisor in Scientology is analogous to a teacher in a class room.  A
Cramming Officer is responsible for the correction of individuals who have
difficulty in executing the techniques of Dianetics and Scientology or
otherwise following the dogma of L. Ron Hubbard to the letter.  Mike Eldridge,
a personal emissary of L. Ron Hubbard, in charge of conducting the search to
find the most qualified person to serve as Supervisor/Cramming Officer,
recommended me to David Miscavige, who ultimately approved my appointment. I
was transferred to, lived and worked at what is known as "Golden Era Studios,"
near Hemet, California.  It is also known as "Gold" or simply "The Base",
where senior management of Scientology is headquartered. 

 9. By Scientology standards, I was a very highly trained auditor and case
supervisor. An auditor in Scientology is a trained practitioner of the pseudo
scientific methodology of psychological counseling commonly referred to as
"The Tech," as dictated and written by Scientology founder L Ron Hubbard. A
case supervisor is also a trained auditor who reads the "auditing" records of
every counseling session performed by an auditor to ensure "The Tech" was
applied exactly.  In Scientology there are 12 levels of auditor and case
supervisor classification, each level being "higher" than the next.  In this
system, I was  certified as a Class 9 Auditor and a certified Class 9 Case
Supervisor.

10. In my capacity as Deputy Inspector General, External, I traveled about the
U.S. and outside of the U.S. on behalf of RTC.  I traveled to Germany, Italy,
Australia,  United Kingdom, Denmark, Mexico and Canada. These trips were
designed to put together an infrastructure that would interface with RTC for
the purpose of trademark enforcement. I was personally chosen by David
Miscavige over Vicki Aznaran to speak on behalf of RTC to a worldwide audience
via satellite to warn them that RTC holds the trademarks of Scientology and
eradicates all those who violate "The Tech" or infringe on trademarks.

11. I became familiar with the trademark laws of the various countries in
which I traveled. I interviewed and retained law firms, and put personnel in
place that would report to RTC and be our site representatives.  I testified
as an expert witness on Scientology technology on behalf of RTC in federal
court in Los Angeles in a RICO action with RTC as the plaintiff in 1985.  In
1983, on orders from L. Ron Hubbard, I brought into existence within RTC a
unit called "The Tech Unit".  The Tech Unit had the responsibility of
inspecting PC files a/k/a Pre-Clear files, (counseling files), in all
Scientology organizations to ensure "The Tech" was being applied 100%
according to the standard tech.

 12. When Hubbard died in 1986, there was a power struggle in Scientology for
the next 18 or so months that resulted in Hubbard's closest and most powerful
aide (Pat Broeker) being removed from Scientology.  Total power was taken over
by David Miscavige who purged the organization of anyone who was friendly with
Broeker.  In mid 1987, because I did not want to participate in Miscavige's
power struggle to become the head of Scientology, I was forcefully removed
from my position and put under armed guard at Happy Valley, located deep in
the desert behind the Soboba Indian Reservation. It is my belief that my
undated resignation, which I signed when appointed to the Board, was then
dated and used to make it appear that I had resigned, when I had not.
	
Practices of Scientology

 13. From time to time, based on orders that I received  from David Miscavige,
I would order others to engage in illegal activities against perceived enemies
of Scientology.  These activities included, but were not limited to,
wire-tapping and document destruction.  For example, on or about April,1983, I
was present at a meeting which took place in Los Angeles, California, at a
Scientology office called Author Services, Inc. (ASI), a for profit company
and  the "literary agency" for Hubbard, run by David Miscavige.  There is no
real corporate structure among the many Scientology corporations. ASI was the
meeting place where various Scientology corporations went to receive orders.
Present at this meeting was David Miscavige, then the Chairman of the Board of
ASI, Vicki Aznaran, Deputy Inspector General of RTC, Marc Yeager, Commanding
officer of CSI, and Lyman Spurlock, who was "Director of Client Affairs" for
ASI.  Mr. Miscavige expressed concern at this meeting that there might
possibly be a raid on Scientology by the IRS.  At that time, none of the
churches of Scientology had received tax exempt status. At this meeting, David
Miscavige announced to the group that the destruction and alteration of
documents to protect Scientology was in progress. One principal reason why tax
exempt status had not been granted was the IRS's position that Scientology
founder, L. Ron Hubbard (LRH), was actually the managing agent of Scientology
in complete disregard of the corporate structure of Scientology.  We knew this
to be a fact, but also knew that it violated IRS rules and thus had to be
hidden.  There was concern that the IRS would obtain the hundreds of daily,
weekly and monthly LRH orders written by Hubbard and distributed throughout
Scientology.  These orders were commonly referred to in Scientology as
"advices" to avoid the appearance that Hubbard was actually running
Scientology.  In fact, Hubbard was running Scientology.  The principal concern
expressed at this meeting was that the LRH orders or "advices" would be used
to name Hubbard as the managing agent of Scientology. Because of an already
existing fear that an LRH "advice" might fall into the wrong hands, these
orders from him were written in a way that we could deny it was from him.  His
name was not on them.  He was never cited in the dispatch except in the third
person.  There was no signature and a  salutation in reply was never more than
"Dear Sir."  The routing at the top referred to him merely as "###", (three
pound signs), while his closest aids, Pat and Annie Broeker, were referred to
as "* ",  (an asterisk).  However, if a person (or agency) got enough of
these, there would be little doubt that we were in touch with Hubbard (via
ASI) and that he was telling us and each corporation what to do to make him
more money. 

14. David Miscavige specifically ordered destruction of any documents in ASI's
posession which would implicate Hubbard as managing agent of Scientology.  He
stated that under his directive the LRH orders, or "advices" were being
collected and transferred by truck to a Riverside County recycling plant where
the documents were to be "pulped."  This method of destruction was considered
to be better than shredding.  I was also put in charge of purging the
remainder of the LRH orders, i.e. "Advices".  This was to include "advices"
that were located in Church of Scientology of California (CSC); Church of
Scientology International (CSI); and RTC. 

 15. Several weeks after the April, 1983 meeting, I attended another  meeting
at the ASI offices concerning the continuing destruction of Scientology
corporate documentation.  In attendance at this meeting were David Miscavige,
Lyman Spurlock, Vicki Aznaran, Norman Starkey, Marty Rathbun, and Scientology
attorney, Earl Cooley. At this meeting, Miscavige, for the first time, stated
that Scientology had been ordered by a court to produce various documents
concerning a former Scientology member, Lawrence Wollersheim, who had a
lawsuit pending in Los Angeles against the Church of Scientology of
California.  The court had ordered Scientology to produce Wollersheim's entire
Pre-Clear file. 

16. A "Pre-Clear" file is one of the several files kept on members. The
Pre-Clear file is the file that includes all written records of all
"confessionals' done by the member.  This means that it includes not only the
most self-damaging material, but it also reflects every problem the person
might have had with the organization, including complaints.  This Pre-Clear
file grows with the person's tenure in Scientology.

17. Mr. Wollersheim's Pre-Clear file was several thousand pages in length and
stood as high as a six-foot tall man.  Initially at this meeting, it was
decided that Mr. Wollersheim's Pre-Clear file would be redacted and culled of
any evidence or documentation which might assist Wollersheim in his lawsuit
against CSC.  There was also concern that the materials known as Clear, OT I,
OT II, OT III, and NED for OT's (NOTS) would be open to public inspection if
Wollersheim's files were produced as ordered.  Scientologists are taught that
a person could catch pneumonia and die if that person is prematurely exposed
to these "upper level" materials without first having taken many hours of
preparatory auditing.  

 18. Wollersheim's Pre-Clear file was purged of any incriminating evidence
against Scirentology based on a direct order from Miscavige in the presence of
Scientology's lead trial counsel, Earl Cooley of Boston, Massachusetts.  Mr.
Cooley thereafter represented to the court that the purged file was indeed the
entire PC File of Mr. Wollersheim. Ultimately, approximately 50 pages were
produced pursuant to the court order.

21. Later, I was informed that a second court order was issued to produce
Wollersheim's entire file.  Faced with the prospect of having to produce the
entire file, Miscavige gave orders that the entire file simply be destroyed by
being pulped. 

22. Pursuant to Miscavige's orders, I ordered Rick Aznaran to take
Wollersheim's Pre-Clear files to the recycling plant in Riverside to be
pulped.  Several hours after I gave the order to have Wollersheim's Pre-Clear
files destroyed, Rick Aznaran returned and confirmed that the records had been
pulped and even showed me a small bottle of pulped material. "Here's what's
left," he said.

23. Members of Scientology are induced to confess to acts that, if not
outright criminal, are embarrassing or possibly destructive to the person's
job, marriage or profession. For example, shoplifting, adultery, masturbation,
homosexuality,  drug abuse, or any other potentially embarassing or illegal
matters are recorded.  Members are urged to write down these compromising
facts in their own handwriting, under the guise that it is a "religious
confessional" for the member's good.  The truth is that these "confessions"
are kept to blackmail and extort members should they dare to speak out against
Scientology. Members are also coerced to sign documents that are self-damaging
in order to protect Scientology in case they dare to leave its control and
speak the damaging truth.  I know all this to be true, because I watched this
done to others; I did it to others; and it was done to me.	

24. I have personally witnessed executive decisions directed to members
instructing them to "end cycle", i.e., die.  I have personally read  written
instructions by Ray Mithoff concerning the following individuals: 	
 a)  Diane Morrison, a personal friend of mine.  She had cancer.  Radiation
treatment is forbidden by Scientology.  She was instructed by Ray Mithoff to
"end cycle."  Her husband, Shawn Morrison, was ordered by Ray Mithoff to
transport her off of the Scientology property at Gilman Hotsprings,
California, to her mother's house so that she would not die on Scientology
property. 
b) Ted Cormier, a personal friend of mine.  He had Parkinson's disease.  He
was ordered to leave Gilman Hotsprings and go directly to Flag for NOTS 34,
auditing to cure his cancer.   When this failed, Ray Mithoff sent him orders
in his Pre-Clear folder for him to "end cycle." He died.  

25.	I have personally reviewed a video of a television interview of
Roxanne Friend, a former Scientologist.   She had cancer which could have been
successfully treated.  She was kidnapped in California and taken across
country in a motorhome to FLAG in Clearwater where she was held against her
will, which prevented her from getting cancer treatment.  After she escaped
she gave this interview that I observed on a television talk show.  She
disclosed that she was beyond treatment because of this delay and subsequently
died. Based on my experience in Scientology, her statements ring true.

My Experience with Isolation

 26.	In 1973, Hubbard announced to the Scientology world that he had solved
the problem of how to handle a person in a "psychotic break".  Hubbard stated
that this was a "technical breakthrough" which possibly ranks with the major
discoveries of the twentieth century.  He further said his discovery means the
last reason to have psychiatry around is gone.  He went on to say the key is
what caused the person to introspect before the psychotic break.  During my
tenure in Scientology I have observed four instances of people having a
psychotic break.  In each case the person was sleep deprived; each had been
told their job performance was inadequate; and each person was subjected to
Scientology ethics.

27. I am familiar with the practice of  "Isolation," also known as "baby
watch" as practiced by Scientology and I have participated in the "handling"
of one Scientologist that was ordered to "Isolation".  No one volunteers to go
into Isolation.  I have seen with my own eyes how a person is driven to the
point of having a "psychotic break" and the subsequent brutality of treatment
the person then receives as a result of the handlers following strict
Scientology methods.

28. In the four instances of Isolation I observed, the person was locked in a
room with at least two other people guarding the exit door.  The people that
watch the person in a psychotic break are not allowed to talk to the person at
all.  They are only allowed to physically restrain the person. The reason
there are people guarding the exit door is that the person wants to leave and
attempts to leave time after time.  By their own policy the person in a
psychotic break is not allowed to leave until the Case Supervisor allows it.
Here is a direct quote from Scientology technical "Introspection Rundown,
Additional Step": "Dear Joe.  What can you guarantee me if you are let out of
Isolation?" If the persons's reply shows continued irresponsibility toward
other dynamics or fixation on one dynamic to the exclusion of others damaged,
the C/S (Case Supervisor) must inform the person of his continued Isolation
and why.  Example: "Dear Joe.  I'm sorry but no go on coming out of isolation
yet..." 

 29. In 1987, I was at a place called Happy Valley, located behind the Soboba
Indian Reservation in California.  Happy Valley is where the Scientology
Rehabilitation Project Force, RPF, is located.  It is a prison /slave labor
camp for Scientologists who no longer ascribe totally to the doctrine of
Scientology. I, along with six other Sea Org members, were ordered to do a
"isolation watch" on another Sea Org member who was having a psychotic break.
Prior to having the psychotic break the person was very normal.  She had been
deprived of sleep for many days due to a deadline she was ordered to meet on
her job.  She was sent to "Ethics" and was constantly humiliated and degraded
for making errors and for falling asleep at her work station.  When she was
given to me to watch she was on her hands and knees and literally barking like
a dog. She thought she was L. Ron Hubbard.  It was at this time that I learned
how forced feeding was done and the extent of restraint we all had to enforce
on a young woman barely 5 feet tall.  I was horrified at just how close she
was to losing her life due to the "help" we were being ordered to give her.
Even though she was now being allowed to sleep,  she could not sleep and had
been up for nearly four days.  She was in a very agitated and violent state.
She would scream for hours until she could scream no more.  She fought to
escape and mutilated herself in the process.  Finally a doctor was called in
and it took four people plus the doctor to hold her down to give her a shot to
make her go to sleep. 

 30.  A major part of the trauma a person experiences in Scientology's
"isolation" treatment is the person's struggle to get away or to get out of
the room they are being confined in.  The young woman I had to "iso watch" had
numerous injuries as a result of her beating on the walls and the door trying
to get away.  She would drift in and out of her psychotic state.  I was
informed by the security guard watching over us all that her family was
desperately trying to find her and during the times when she was "okay" I had
to let her call her mother after I told her what to say.  I held a separate
phone while she talked to her family and when things started to get "weird" I
would end the conversation.  She would tell her mother that she was okay and
would be home soon.  During this time she became very upset with me because I
made her see a doctor she did not know and who was not allowed to talk to her
while he was giving her shots.  She physically attacked me on more than one
occasion.  This was a public relations nightmare for Scientology and this is
why she was told to lie to her family about what was really going on with her.
This went on for two months.  After she seemed stable for a week and completed
the "Introspection Rundown" she was made to sign a release form which in
essence said Scientology was not responsible for what had happened to her and
she was quickly sent home.

31. If I had not forcibly made her drink water, I am positive that based upon
my own observations she would have died.

32. The people who are selected to watch a person in a psychotic break are
trained to make a person physically comply with orders and demands.
Controlling a person physically is taught in Scientology in its Training
Routine Courses.  As an example, in what is called "Training Routine 7, High
School Indoc" the Scientology student is trained to never be stopped by a
Pre-Clear.  No matter what the person in "Isolation" does or says, they are
not allowed to leave until the C/S says they can.

My Involvement in the case of Lisa McPherson

33.	I have been retained as an expert witness and trial consultant in the
case of Lisa McPherson since Nov, 1998.  In Dec, 1998, Scientology
representative Glenn Stilo brought Lisa McPherson's Pre Clear files to the
office of Ken Dandar by order of this court for inspection.  Glenn Stilo and I
knew each other when I was in Scientology.  At that time, Glenn was fully
aware that I was present at Mr. Dandar's Office and that I was there
inspecting Lisa McPherson's auditing files. I have also reviewed the
"caretaker logs"  of Lisa McPherson at the Fort Harrison Hotel and her Ethics
File.

 34. It is obvious from these files that Lisa McPherson complained that
auditing and Scientology were not working for her in 1995 and  that she wanted
to leave and return to Texas.  Her "stats" were down, i.e., her production and
income at AMC Publishing.  As a result, she was placed in Ethics at her work
where the records revealed that she was constantly doing "amends" and writing
"O/W's", overts and write-ups, which resulted in less time to obtain adequate
sleep which further, in my own observations, leads to psychotic breaks.  This
is confirmed by L. Ron Hubbard in his own writings, "Introspection Rundown
Additional Steps."

35. FLAG at the Ft. Harrison Hotel is  "the mecca of technical perfection"
according to Scientology.  I can attest that it is a high crime in Scientology
to alter or ignore the tech.  It is also a high crime to lose or omit vital
information from any PC folder, including "caretaker logs."  The Lisa
McPherson "caretaker logs" are missing substantial day-to-day portions, in
particular, the last three and one-half days of her Isolation.  This is no
accident.  Records of this magnitude are not lost.  Based on my experience,
these missing records were intentionally destroyed to conceal material matters
damaging to Scientology. Hubbard explicitly writes in CS SERIES 97 and CS
SERIES 98  that "omissions from folders and complete loss of folders is a very
serious matter...."  If proven, expulsion from Scientology is mandatory.

36. I have been asked to address the issue of whether or not Lisa McPherson
would have consented to her own isolation prior to experiencing a psychotic
break.  Without question, no Scientologist, except a Class 4 auditor or above,
would have prior knowledge of how someone would be treated who is declared to
be PTS Type III: a "Potential Trouble Source" who is experiencing a psychotic
break. Only those auditors would have the knowledge that "Isolation" is
implemented or the details of "Isolation" for those who are PTS Type III.  In
reviewing the Scientology records of Lisa McPherson, she was not an auditor
and would therefore never have acquired the knowledge prior to becoming PTS
Type III to consent to being held against her will in isolation.

 37. In Scientology technical bulletin "Search and Discovery" under the
subtitle "Handling Type III", L. Ron Hubbard wrote, "But there will always be
some failures as the insane sometimes withdraw into rigid unawareness as a
final defense, sometimes can't be kept alive and sometimes are too hectic and
distraught to ever become quiet, the extremes of too quiet and never quiet
have a number of psychiatric names such as "catatonia" (withdrawn totally) and
"manic" (too hectic)." 

38.  Following the dogma of L. Ron Hubbard to the letter is the highest
priority for a person practicing Scientology.  In a Scientology policy letter
called "Keeping Scientology Working", L. Ron Hubbard says "The proper
instruction attitude is, 'You're here so you're a Scientologist.  Now we are
going to make you into an expert auditor no matter what happens.  We'd rather
have you dead than incapable."

 39. In terms of the report and control of RTC, it is required by any and all
Scientology organizations to report directly to RTC any extreme deviations
from "standard tech". For example, it would be considered a deviation when a
Scientology Pre-Clear, (a person that has paid for auditing services from
Scientology), has left Scientology and threatens to sue. Other examples would
include a Pre-Clear who is not getting the expected results or one who has had
a psychotic break (PTS Type III).  Once the RTC Tech Unit completed a review
of a  Pre-Clear folder, it would be sent back via the Office of the Senior
Case Supervisor International (located in Church of Scientology International)
to ensure compliance to orders and correction as deemed necessary by the RTC
Tech Unit.  CSI receives updated status reports and without question would
have received updated status reports on the Isolation of Lisa McPherson and
her deteriorating medical condition because RTC has an on site representative
at FLAG. These reports would be composed and sent up line to Ray Mithoff at
RTC by the Senior Case Supervisor, Alain Kartuzinski.  Ray Mithoff would then
take the report to RTC. The Office of Special Affairs, OSA, locally and
internationally, would be informed of the Isolation as well. Marty Rathbun,
Inspector General Ethics, is over all the legal affairs of every case and
situation in Scientology and would also have knowledge of a PTS Type III in
Isolation.  

40. The above reporting procedure is still practiced in the Scientology
conglomerate today.  For example, in the attached "D/Inspector General
Office," published by Religious Technology Center and copyrighted in 1997, it
compels reporting directly to RTC any listed situation, such as "any person
who acts PTS Type III." This is all done in order to help RTC "locate and
eradicate any suppression (i.e., a threat) and thereby make sure that
Scientology keeps working."  Lisa McPherson was deemed PTS Type III and
therefore was such a threat. 

41. RTC receives all reports on situations involving Isolation for guidance
from RTC to the Senior Case Supervisor, Sr. C/S.  RTC then reports the matter
to Sr. C/S  INT, i.e., International, office for further investigation.  Sr.
C/S INT then reports back to the RTC Reports Officer.  Ray Mithoff is the Sr.
C/S INT at CSI, the mother church.  Ray Mithoff, Marty Rathbun and David
Miscavige,  as they have done on other occasions within my personal knowledge,
meet and discuss various options available to Scientology on how to deal with
a public relations flap. No one else has the authority to do so.  Lisa
McPherson was such a public relations flap to Scientology since she took her
clothes off in public and was placed in Isolation.

 42. In records I have reviewed provided by FLAG in this case concerning Lisa
McPherson, she had previously complained that Scientology was not working for
her and her stats were down.  Based upon my own experience and Scientology
procedures and protocol, these three individuals would have met and discussed
on several occasions what to do with Lisa since she was not improving in
Isolation.  It is important to know that  Scientology has no prohibition on
members seeking emergency medical treatment as stated in HCOB Physically ILL
PCs and Pre-OTs, 12-3-69, which mandates a medical cure before auditing, where
Hubbard states "if we already know he is ill we should call in the doctor."
page 328 of Volume 8 of the Technical Bulletins.

43. Yet, from the available records,  it is apparent to me that these three
individuals: Mithoff, Rathbun, and Miscavige, had  no option other than to
permit her to die in Isolation rather than take her to the hospital for
emergency medical treatment and risk embarrassing questions from the attending
physicians, press, and authorities with likely claims of imprisonment and
abuse being made by Lisa McPherson upon her recovery. This is true because in
Scientology it is never an option to be held accountable.  Contrary to their
own policy that "THE CORRECT ACTION ON AN INSANE PATIENT IS A FULL SEARCHING
CLINICAL EXAMINATION BY A COMPETENT MEDICAL DOCTOR." Page 327, Volume 8 of the
Technical Bulletins, Scientology decided in Lisa's case, through these three
individuals acting through FLAG, not to follow this particular policy and let
her die.  Scientology  provides an option called "end cycle" which is
permitting and ordering the person to die. It is obvious to me that the
decision was to permit Lisa McPherson to die rather than face an extreme
public relations flap by taking her to the local emergency room in her morbid
condition as described in the "caretaker logs." 

44. Based on my personal experience and expertise in Scientology, I have
formed the following opinion: 
Lisa McPherson was held against her will in Isolation and when she did not
respond to Scientology technical handling, FLAG, on orders from David
Miscavige, Ray Mithoff, and Marty Rathbun sat mute and watched her die after
she no longer had the strength to fight for her freedom.  Her death was no
accident.  It was the chosen option to minimize a public relations flap.	

45.	I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of
Florida that the foregoing is true and correct. 
 

JESSE PRINCE
