    A Forensic Psychiatrist Evaluates 
    ESP 

    February 2003 

    By John Hochman, M.D. 

    Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral 
    Sciences 

    University of California Los Angeles 
    Introduction 

    I have reviewed a manual for a 16 day, ten hours per day; large group awareness training called 
    "Executive Success Programs, " which also calls Itself "ESP." 

    I address the following questions: 

    1. Is mind control Involved in this training? 

    2. is the course curriculum "cult-like* in some way? 

    3. What negative effects or consequences might such a program produce? 

    I also viewed the ESP website. The website had a limited amount of material, some of which was 
    helpful to me in forming my opinions. 

    There is much in the content and format of ESP that is not at all original, and is quite similar to 
    aspects of a number of cults and cult-like organizations with which I am familiar. 

    Mind Control and the ESP Intensive 

    Mind control represents Indoctrination without informed consent It relies on calculated strategies 
    to mislead and to misinform. It particularly relies on emotional manipulation. 

    Long hours: A group using mind control will attempt to maximize the influence of group leaders 
    on participants, at the expense of any ongoing influence of friends and relatives. One way to 
    quickly effect this change is to maximize the amount of time that group participants are with group 
    leaders. ESP Intensive participants are signing up for sixteen ten-hour days, which will either be 
    experienced successively, or in five-day segments. Although three hours a day are allotted for 
    lunch and dinner breads as days go on. 

    Of further concern, the manual states In Italics, "We find our students don't want to leave at the 
    end of the dayr Since participants have been experiencing a day scheduled to start at 8 AM and 
    end at 10 PM, under usual circumstances, most participants would be tired and eager to go to see 
    friends and family, and get a night's rest to prepare for another long day starting at 8 AM. This 
    suggests to me that emotional appeals or other manipulation may occur to get everyone to stay 
    around even longer. 



    Limitations in ability to get feedback from friends and family! Participants are told to 
    promise not to tell non-participants of what they learn in the Intensive, as well as Its methods. 



    Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed' 11/25/03 Page 26 of 79 
    S A P : IMH^t Evffls ESP NO. 138 ^ P P^ 1 3 of 4 



    They will be unable to respond to routine questions they would be expected to receive, such as, 
    "What did you learn today? 11 or "What's going on at the seminar you are attending?" This serves as 
    to distance the participant from his ongoing relationships. It also serves to prevent the participant 
    from getting any feedback about what he is experiencing from people in the outside world, some of 
    whom care about the participant very much. 

    Secrecy; Participants are told to promise not to share with non-participants their recollection of 
    content or methods of the Intensive. Participants are mislead into feeling guilty for being a 
    "promise breaker" If they talk about their personal experiences over the course of many hours. This 
    effects a partial shutdown of communication with friends and family, and serves to strengthen a 
    common bond with the other secret-sharers. 

    Effect of idiosyncratic vocabulary on communication: Further communication s hutdown with 
    friends and family occurs as numerous English words are redefined to fit the peculiar meanings of 
    group leaders. The result is communications that are near Incomprehensible to outsiders (e.g.: The 
    mission of the human team is to build value and to uphold each other), This serves to embed the 
    participant into the group and Isolate him from outsiders. 

    Pre-emptive neutralization of criticism of the group by participants and their 
    family/friends early on; What the group calls "shifter strategies" is given much attention in the 
    Intensive. It Is clearly taught that these represent undesirable behaviors that should be met with 
    disapproval by other group members. Then end result is that if a participant criticizes things that 
    the group does, he is a "suppress! ve/* Since it is likely that group outsiders will perceive aspects of 
    the group's activities as "manipulative" or as a "cult," these two words are used as the sole 
    examples of "abstract terms" that a Shifter will use. The clear purpose of this didactic exercise by 
    the group Is to encourage participants to ignore friends and relatives who are likely to criticize the 
    group using these exact words. Finally, the Intensive attempts to Impart a sense of superiority to 
    participants simply for learning £splan theory ("Esplans understand the model, but non-Espians do 
    not"); such a sense of superiority would encourage participants to discourage criticism of their 
    activity from others. 

    Paramilitary ritual* and regalia; Paramilitary structure enhances the ability of leaders to control 
    participants through a "chain of command." [Keith Raniere] the leader's title as "Vanguard" is a 
    word with military origins, and participants are routinely expected to "thank" Vanguard at the end 
    of each and every session- One's rank in the group is constantly visible by scarf color and number 
    of stripes on the scarf, and this is reinforced by a ritual two-handed handshake where the higher 
    rank person's hands go on top. Advancement includes ability to be a "coach," which appears to be 
    a monitor, (sometimes-daily monitor), for members lower in rank. Clearly a submissive relationship 
    of sorts to one's superior in rank Is promoted. 

    Required daily contact with superiors is framed as personal growth: Since the paramilitary 
    regalia makes It clear who Is superior to who in rank, ongoing participants are required to make a 
    daily brief phone call to "check-in" with a "coach." Promotion to a higher level scarf cannot occur 
    without approval from one's coach, who becomes part of the group's eyes-and-ears to see if 
    participants are, for example, becoming suppressive, Moreover, promotion In this group is iced 
    over with the title of showing "persistence" to a "long-term commitment" Since dally checking in 
    like this is an unnatural thing to do for most grown-ups, any discomfort will most certainly be met 
    with the confrontation that they "need to be able to keep a long-term commitment." 

    Cult-Like Elements of the ESP Intensive 

    Pretensions to Science: In an attempt to Instant credibility in this era of technology triumphs, 
    this group describes its activities as "technology" and "science." (Other groups have done the same 
    in the past). Yet there is no evidence of any validation using scientific methods of anything the 
    group does* The group does make use of "pop psychology" theories, tips for greater efficiency, 
    gimmicks to impress others, and other notions that have already been widely publicized in 



    Case 1:03-gv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 27 of 79 
    SEP « 3 ; , 2003 r [0 53 AM is t E^ L _lW es NO. 1 38" jP^ 



    seminars and books over the decades - so this is hardly technology that the group can claim credit 
    for. The group also presents gross oversimplifications of psychological theory and of the human 
      condition (e.g.: rt AII anger Is created as a result of a conflict in values/) The group's leader may 
      have coined some maxims with a ring of truth, but again, this not science. 

      Unsubstantiated extravagant claims: As "proof" of the value of their "technology," the group 
      claims unprecedented results training over 400,000 individuals. Yet their website only comes up 
      with a few dozen testimonials. That's about one testimonial for every 10,000 participants. 



      Self-Serving Morality: Whether cult-like organizations claim to be religions, philosophies, etc, 
      each one has it's own self-created moral system, which is typically self-serving. The emphasis here 
      is on how violating the pledge involves the participant in hurting himself by telling others anything 
      about what he has been doing and learning for hours on end. The participant is counseled that to 
      tell others Is "compromising [his] Inner honesty and integrity/ There is no mention of how this 
      secrecy essentially benefits the group leaders, who are shielded from criticism from outsiders when 
      no one knows exactly what they are doing. 

      Messianic pretensions without discussing the obvious profit motives The mission of ESP is 
      to develop an integrated ethical framework of human experience to stop the destruction of value in 
      the world and move humanity forward to remove fear-based activities from the world/ ESP is 
      presented as a means of saving the world from "hunger, theft, dishonesty, envy and insecurity/ 
      After stating this, participants are urged to "pledge" to enroll people in ESP. Good intentions are 
      praise-worthy, but only to a point. Prior to the world being saved, the only guaranteed result of 
      recruitment and continued seminar enrollment Is up-front revenue generation. The fees are high, 
      and speak for themselves. Members are encouraged to advance In "rank," which requires, among 
      other things, more courses, which means more fees for ESP. 

      Self-coronation offenders: Participants are instructed to address the founder of ESP as 
      "Vanguard." The manual I reviewed implies he is the source of all the "technology" that the group 
      has, since no one else is mentioned. There appears to be no dissenting views, and his philosophies 
      are often presented In the third person plural "We believe." The ESP website suggests there Is now 
      a queen bee of sorts, as a Ms. Salzman, who was a Senior Proctor in this manual, as being 
      upgraded to be the group's sole "Prefect." All of this Is soft peddled to participants as analogous to 
      calling your dentist (who finished a universally recognised course of study) by the title "doctor." 

      Success in the Executive Success Program is about becoming a more thorough Esplan 
      and not an Executive: Although the program seems to promote skills so that participants could 
      become executives if they wished, the thrust of the program is clearly to get participants to spend 
      continuing hours taking ESP courses, signing up friends and family to attend seminars, gaining 
      scarf-status in the Espian world, adopting Esplan meanings to English words, etc. All of these 
      achievements are essentially irrelevant to goings on In the "real world/ Calling friends and 
      relatives to set up appointments to recruit them into ESP is presented to participants as the way to 
      practice getting "a real edge in relationships" and "impressing a special person," 



      Possible negative effects of the ESP Intensive 

      The ESP Intensive appears to be a gateway that encourages participants to attend further training 
      sessions or seminars, and get friends and family to do the same. In a general sense, the goal is 
      integration of individuals into a subculture - however, a particular kind of subculture. It is a 
      kingdom of sorts, ruled by a Vanguard, who writes his own dictionary of the English language, has 
      his own moral code, and the ability to generate taxes on subjects by having them participate in his 
      seminars. It Is a kingdom with no physical borders, but with psychological borders - influencing 
      how his subjects spend their time, socialize, and think. Increasing involvement serves to 
      Increasingly distance participants from their relationships in a manner that is slow and subtle, and 
      thus not at all obvious to them, 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 28 of 79 * 

      SEP. 3, 2003J0:54AM. C MLTW _ CD NO. 138 n P. 15. 
