ase l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 1 of 7.9 

■ i.i.o ( niC I COURT 

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT OF M Y. 

NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK 




NXIVM CORPORATION, Formerly Known as EXECUTIVE , A Wi lFNi;fc K. BAF HM . CL 
SUCCESS PROGRAMS, INC. and FIRST PRINCIPLES, INC., AL BANY 

Plaintiffs, NOTICE OF MOTION 

FOR SUMMARY 
-- against - JUDGMENT 

THE ROSS INSTITUTE, RICK ROSS a/k/a Civil Action No. 03-CV-0976 
"RICKY ROSS", JOHN HOCHMAN and (TJM / DRH) 

STEPHANIE FRANCO, 

Defendants. 



NXIVM CORPORATION, f/k/a EXECUTIVE SUCCESS 
PROGRAMS, INC. and FIRST PRINCIPLES, INC., 

Plaintiffs, Civil Action No. 03-CV-1051 

(TJM / DRH) 

~ against ~ 

THE ROSS INSTITUTE, RICK ROSS a/k/a 
"RICKY ROSS", and PAUL R. MARTIN, PH.D., 
WELLSPRTNG RETREAT, INC. and STEPHANIE 
FRANCO, 

Defendants. 



MOTION BY: 



DATE, TIME and PLACE 
OF HEARING: 



Defendants The Ross Institute, Rick Ross a/k/a 
"Ricky Ross"; Paul R. Martin, PH.D. and 
Wellspring Retreat, Inc. 



/ 



Q io{oo/rb- 

January 12, 2004,*^ as soon thereafter as 
counsel can be heard, at the United States 
District Court located at the U.S. Courthouse, 
445 Broadway, Albany, New York. 



SUPPORTING PAPERS: 



1. Affidavit of Thomas F. Gleason, sworn to the 



9 th day of October, 2003, with exhibits attached; 



1 



Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 2 of 79 



2. Defendants Statement of Material Facts Not 
in Dispute Pursuant to Local Civil Rule 
7.1(a)(3) dated October 9, 2003; and 



3. Memorandum of Law. 



RELIEF REQUESTED: 



ANSWERING AFFIDAVITS: 



DATED: Albany, New York 
October 9, 2003 



TO: Kevin A. Luibrand, Esq. 
Tobin and Dempf, LLP 
33 Elk Street 

Albany, New York 12207 

Arlen L. Olsen, Esq. 
Schmeiser, Olsen & Watts, LLP 
3 Lear Jet Lane, Suite 201 
Latham, New York 12110 



A. An order pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure: 

(i) 56 for summary judgment dismissing the 
Complaints in their entirety. 

B. For such other, further and different relief as 
the Court deems just and proper. 

Answering papers, if any, must be served in 
hand by October 30, 2003, unless otherwise 
sd between the partis 





[OMAS F. GLEkSON, ESQ. 
Bar Roll No. 101791 

GLEASON, DUNN, WALSH & O'SHEA 

Attorneys for Defendants The Ross Institute, 
Rick Ross a/k/a "Ricky Ross", Paul R. Martin, 
PH.D. and Wellspring Retreat, Inc. 
102 Hackett Boulevard 
Albany, New York 12209 
(518) 432-7511 



2 



Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 3 of 79 



Anthony Sylvester, Esq. 
Riker, Danzig, Scherer, Hyland 

and Perretti, LLP 
Headquarters Plaza 
One Speedwell Avenue 
Morristown, New Jersey 07962-1981 

Linda B. Johnson, Esq. 
Hinman, Howard & Kartell, LLP 
700 Security Mutual Building 
80 Exchange Street 
P.O. Box 5250 

Binghamton, New York 13902-5250 

Peter R. Osinoff, Esq. 

Bonne, Bridges, Mueller, O'Keefe 

& Nichols 
Wilshire Serrano Building 
3699 Wilshire Blvd., 10 th Floor 
Los Angeles, CA 90010-27119 



3 



Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 4 of 79 



GLEASON 
AFFIDAVIT 



Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 5 of 79 



UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK 



NXIVM CORPORATION, Formerly Known as EXECUTIVE 
SUCCESS PROGRAMS, INC. and FIRST PRINCIPLES, INC., 

Plaintiffs, 

ATTORNEY'S AFFIDAVIT 

~ against -- 

THE ROSS INSTITUTE, RICK ROSS a/k/a Civil Action No. 03-CV-0976 

"RICKY ROSS", JOHN HOCHMAN and (TJM / DRH) 

STEPHANIE FRANCO, 

Defendants. 



NXIVM CORPORATION, f/k/a EXECUTIVE SUCCESS 
PROGRAMS, INC. and FIRST PRINCIPLES, INC., 

Plaintiffs, Civil Action No. 03-CV-l 051 

(TJM / DRH) 

— against — 

THE ROSS INSTITUTE, RICK ROSS a/k/a 
"RICKY ROSS", and PAUL R. MARTIN, PH.D., 
WELLSPRING RETREAT, INC. and STEPHANIE 
FRANCO, 

Defendants. 



STATE OF NEW YORK ) 
COUNTY OF ALBANY ) ss: 

THOMAS F. GLEASON, being duly sworn, deposes and says: 

1. Your deponent is a member of the law firm Gleason, Dunn, Walsh & O'Shea, 

attorneys for Defendants The Ross Institute, Rick Ross a/k/a "Ricky Ross", Paul D. Martin, 

PH.D. and Wellspring Retreat, Inc. (hereinafter collectively the "Institute Defendants"), in 



1 



ase l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 6 of 79 



the above captioned actions, and as such is fully familiar with the facts and circumstances 
hereinafter set forth. 

2. This affidavit is respectfully submitted in support the Institute Defendants' motion 
to dismiss the complaints pursuant to FRCP Rule 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(6) and for summary 
judgment pursuant to FRCP Rule 56. 

3. The Complaints in these actions were filed on August 6, 2003 and August 22, 
2003, respectively and the Defendants filed their Answer, with respect to 03-CV-0976 on 
September 2, 2003 and their Amended Answer in the consolidated actions on September 12, 
2003. In the Complaint, the Plaintiffs' assert two causes of action, the first for a claimed 
copyright violation as a result of the Defendants Institute and Ross publishing information 
critical of the Plaintiffs' "executive success programs." The allegedly offending articles are 
attached as Exhibits "H", "I" and "J" to the Complaint (03-CV-1051). 

4. The Plaintiffs' have also attached as Exhibits "A" through "D" of the Complaint 
in Civil Action No. 03-CV-1051, materials of the Plaintiffs' which Plaintiffs' claim are 
protected by the copyright laws, and which Plaintiffs' assert were improperly published by 
Defendants Institute and Ross. 

5. It is respectfully submitted that a review of the publications by the Defendants 
Institute and Ross, concerning which the Plaintiffs make complaint, clearly are in the nature 
of criticism of Plaintiffs' material, and as such are protected from any claim of infringement 
under the doctrine of fair use. Defendants Institute and Ross claim in this action that the 
Plaintiffs' effort to prevent publication of materials critical of the Plaintiffs' program is a 



2 



Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 7 of 79 

blatant attempt to inhibit the free exchange of ideas and debate concerning the Plaintiffs' 
program. 

6. Plaintiffs' supply no support for its claim that criticism of its program destroys the 
fair use of quoted portions of Plaintiffs' materials. It is submitted that, in fact such criticism 
is an essential aspect of the doctrine of fair use. Plaintiff does not assert a claim for 

I defamation, and it is clear that no such claim would be viable. 

■ | 

7. As noted by Religious Tech Center v. Lerma , 897 F. Supp. 260, 262-263 (EDVA 
1995), in a case where there is a reasonable contention regarding the fair use of quoted 
material, such a presumption is inapplicable and there may be a strong interest in the 
publication of the secondary work. 

8. The Plaintiffs have made no allegations that the Defendants Institute and Ross 
seek to perform an executive training program similar to that which the Plaintiffs' seek 
operate. The use of the quoted material clearly is for purposes of criticizing the Plaintiffs' 
program and as such is constitutionally protected free speech. Accordingly, for reasons 
stated in the accompanying Memorandum of Law, Summary Judgment pursuant to FRCP 56 
should be granted in all respects, together with such other and further relief as to the Court 
may seem just an appropriate. 

9. Attached hereto as Exhibit "A" is the Affidavit of Rick Ross dated September 3, 
2003; and as Exhibit "B" hereto is the Affidavit of Rick Ross dated August 25, 2003. 

10. Attached hereto as Exhibit "C" is the transcript of the Court Decision of the 
Hon. Thomas J. McAvoy dated September 8, 2003, and as Exhibit "D" hereto is the Order 
dated September 9, 2003. 



3 



Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 8 of 79 



WHEREFORE, your deponent respectfully requests that this Court enter an order 
dismissing the Complaints and granting summary judgment to Defendants, together with 
costs and disbursements of this motion, and for such other and further relief as to the Court 
may seem just and appropriate. 





)M AS F. GL 
Bar Roll No. 101791 




to before n^this 
[y of October, 2)003 




fotafy Public 



ANNE ASCEN7I 
Notary Public, State of New York 
Qualified m Alb^-v County 
Reg. No. 4777770 ; 
Commission Expires 



4 



Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 9 of 79 



EXHIBIT 

A 



f Case l:03-cy-00976-GLS*DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 10 of 79 t 

09/03/2003 02:17 2012223549 RDSS PAGE 



UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK 

NXIVM CORPORATION, £Tc/a 
EXECUTIVE SUCCESS PROGRAMS, INC 
and FIRST PRINCIPLES, INC., 

Plaintiffs 

CIVIL ACTION NO. O3-CV-1051 
v. HON. THOMAS J, McAVQY* U-S-DJ, 

THE ROSS INSTITUTE, RICK ROSS a/k/a 
"RICKY ROSS", PAUL R. MARTIN, PH.D. and 
STEPHANIE FRANCO, 

Defendants. 

SECOND AFFIDAVIT OF RICK ROSS 

Now comes Rick Ross and after being duly sworn, deposes and says as follows: 

1 . Attached hereto as Exhibit A is a copy of my Affidavit as filed in NXTVM 
Corporation, et al v. The Ross Institute , No. 03-CV-976 (N.D.N.Y.). I reaffirm all of the 
averments in this Affidavit in their entirety. 

2. The Complaint in the above action alleges, at paragraph 39., that "Upon 
information and belief, at least one defendant, Rick Ross, has a $4,000,000 judgement [sic] 
against him (annexed [to the Complaint] as Exhibit F) which has not been satisfied and is 
insolvent, thus monetary damages will not provide an adequate remedy." 

3. The allegation that there is a $4,000,000 judgment against me which remains 
unsatisfied is False. As reported in an article published in the Phoenix New Times in December 
1 996, a copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit B, the largest portion of the judgment, 
$3,000,000 in favor of Jason Scott, was settled by the payment by me of $5,000 to Mr. Scott, 



, Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 11 of 79 » 

69/03/2003 02: 17 2012223549 ROSS PAGE 



along with my agreement to provide Mr, Scott with 200 hours of my professional services, free 
of charge. 

4. Plaintiffs and their attorneys could easily have verified the foregoing facts 
through a minimal investigation. A copy of the above-referenced article, along with other 
articles and information concerning the underlying lawsuit, have been posted on the Ross 
Institute website and available for free to the general public for years. I caused the Ross Institute 
to post this adverse information concerning myself because I believe that the public has the right 
to know this information. I also believe that the public has the right to know adverse, 
unflattering and critical information and opinion concerning the plaintiffs and their organization. 

Signed under the pains and penalties of perjury this j>6|aay of September, 2003. 





Case l:03-ev-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 12 of 79 



Exhibit A 



Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 13 of 79 



SEE EXHIBIT "B" TO GLEASON AFFIDAVIT 
DATED OCTOBER 9, 2003 
ATTACHED HERETO 



Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 14 of 79 



EXHIBIT 
B 



Case 1:03-;OV-00976-GLS^DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 15 of 79 

SEP. 3.2003 10:50AM MLTW NO. 138 P. 2 



UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK 



NXIVM CORPORATION, tfk/a 
EXECUTIVE SUCCESS PROGRAMS, INC. 
and FIRST PRINCIPLES, INC., 

Plaintiffe 



v. 



THE ROSS INSTITUTE, RICK ROSS a/k/a 
"RICKY ROSS", JOHN HOCHMAN and 
STEPHANIE FRANCO, 

Defendants. 



OFN.V. 
ORIGINAL miBB 

, AUG 8 5 2003 
LAWRENCE K. BAERMM, CLERK 



CIVIL ACTION NO. 03-CV-976 
HON. THOMAS XMoAVQY, 
U.S.D.J. 



AFFIDAVIT OF RICK ROSS 



Now comes Rick Ross and after being duly sworn, deposes and says as Mows: 

1 . I reside at 20 River Court Apt. 221 1 Jersey City, New Jersey. I am the 
Executive Director of the Ross Institute, which is located at 1 13 Pavonia Ave. #323 
Jersey City, New Jersey. Both the Ross Institute and I are defendants in the above- 
referenced action. I have personal knowledge of the facts that are set forth herein and I 
submit this affidavit in opposition to the application of plaintiffs NXTVM Corporation, 
formerly known as Executive Success Programs, Ihc, and First Principles, Inc. 
(collectively "ESP") for temporary and preliminary injunctive relief 

2. I have reviewed the papers submitted by Executive Success Program 
(ESP) now known as NXTVM including the affidavits of Nancy Salzman, Michael Sutton 
and Aaron Kassin.. I have also reviewed the affidavit of defendant Stephanie Franco. The 
statements of Michael Sutton and Aaron Kassin contained misstatements regarding my 



Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 16 of 79 

SEP. 3. .2003 1 0:50AM MLTW NO, 138 P. 3 

time with them and the puipose of that time. And the statements of Nancy Salzraan 
grossly mischaracterize my work, business concerns and Web site. 

3. In September of 2002 1 was contacted by the Sutton family, Michael 
Sutton's parents were deeply concerned about their son's involvement with ESP. They 
asked me what I knew about the organization and I said that I had not heard of it. The 
Buttons requested that I research the group and later review with them my impressions of 
the organization and its programs. 

4. I reviewed the ESP Web site with its program descriptions, philosophy and 
touted "technology." Their training seemed very similar if not identical to other 
controversial groups I have studied, such as EST, Scientology and Landmark Education. 

5. I met with the Suttons to discuss my impressions. This meeting took place 
in October. We discussed the contents of the ESP Web site; its program descriptions and 
family concerns about Michael Sutton's future considering the growing influence ESP 
exerted his life. The family ultimately decided upon an intervention. 

<5. I am a consultant and intervention specialist regarding controversial and/or 
potentially unsafe groups, some of which have been called "cults.' 1 This has been the 

focus of my work for twenty years. Such interventions are an educational process, not 

i 

therapy or counseling. It involves a professional presentation and dialog about a particular 
group and/or leader, This often includes a detailed discussion about the group's methods 
of recruitment, indoctrination, persuasion and retention techniques, The focus of such an 
intervention is to inform the subject This effort not only includes the person involved in a 
group, but also their family and often others who are concerned. The puipose of such an 
intervention is to hopefully stimulate critical thinking and ultimately help the subject 



Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 17 of 79 

SEP. 3. 2003 1 0:5 1AM MLTW NO, 138 P. 4 

{ 

  I 

  they had about their son's involvement with ESP. The Sutton's had no interest in ESP 
  "protected materials," only the undue influence and subsequent control that Nancy 
  Saizman, Keith Raniere and ESP exercised over their son's life. 

  10. During the intervention Nancy Saltan called Michael Sutton. One day I 
  sat next to him as they conversed. Ms, Salzman suggested that it would be a good idea for 
  ESP to be evaluated by well recognized "cult experts" and Michael Sutton subsequently 
  requested me to provide a list of the "top ten" such experts I would suggest. I provided 
  him with a list which included John Hochman, M.D., a forensic psychiatrist, and Paul 
  Martin, Ph.D. ? a clinical psychologist 

  1 1 . When we parted in Florida Michael Sutton seemed interested in further 
  discussion and investigation regarding the issues we discussed concerning ESP. We met 
  again in New York and New Jersey for further discussions during December at his family 
  home and at his office. 

  12. Stephanie Franco joined one meeting at the Sutton family home, She came 
  to explain to Mi chael her own concerns about ESP, why she left the group and her fears 
  for others still involved. At some point during this meeting, she advised us that she had a 
    workbook or study guide from ESP. She later loaned this workbook to her brother 
    Jeffrey. Jeffrey Sutton later sent me copies of the workbook, 

    13. The Sutton's were also very worried about their daughter Leslie and her 
    husband Aaron Kassin, who were also involved with ESP.. They asked if I would come to 
    their home again and accompany them to Aaron and Leslie's home for another family 
    discussion. Aaron had been recruited by Michael Sutton to attend ESP programs and the 



    4 



    Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 18 of 79 

    SEP. 3. 2003 10:51AM MLTW NOi 138 p 

    Sutton family felt the programs had had a negative and disturbing effect upon him as 
    well. 

    1 4. On or about December 28, 2002, 1 met with the Suttons and we walked 
    over to the Kassin residence, which is quite close to the Sutton home in Elderon, New 
    Jersey* Neither the Sutton's nor I had any interest in Aaron giving us "protected 
    information" about ESP* We only wanted to discuss the Suttons' concerns about how ESP 

    . had affected his life and their son Michael, The only attempt to "elicit information from 
    [Aaron]" was requesting he respond to family concerns and frankly discuss what we had 
    learned about ESP and Keith Raniere. 

    1 5 . During this discussion I may have mentioned that I had reviewed ESP 
    material, such as the- organization's website, and the study guide I received from 
    Stephanie, but I never asked Aaron to "provide [me] with confidential materials/' 

    16. Until the filing of this lawsuit, neither Stephanie Franco nor anyone else 
    ever mentioned the existence of any confidentiality agreement to me and I was not aware 
    of any confidentiality agreement I never received any information suggesting that ESP 
    considered its workbook or other materials to be "trade secrets* until after this lawsuit 
    was filed. In fact, as noted above, the substance of the ESP materials seemed to be 
    similar if not identical to materials I have reviewed in connection with my study of other 
    groups. After this lawsuit was filed I was informed that ESP alleged Stephanie Franco 
    had somehow violated "confidentiality" regarding ESP and its property, and that it 
    considered at least some of its materials to be trade secrets. 

    1 7. I never advised Aaron that I "intended to publish the ESP materials on 



    Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 19 of 79 

    SEP. 3. 2003 1 0:5 1 AM MLTW NO. 133 P. 6 



    [my] website." And we certainly didtrt discuss confidentiality, trademark, copyright or 
    trade secret issues. We spent our time discussing femily concerns regarding Aaron's 
    welfare. 

    1 8 , The Sutton family sought further expert opinion. They retained John 
    Hochman and Paul Martin to review ESP's programs, as described-in ESFs website and 
    study guide, Michael agreed that after these reports were completed there would be 
    another meeting during which Michael would discuss -the reports with the doctors, These 
    meetings were planned to take place by phone or in person at Michael's office in 
    Manhattan. However, Michael Sutton did not follow through and never met with the 
    doctors. There were no further meetings or discussion and the case was closed. 

    19, Some months later, due to my continued concern about ESP and its 
    potential to harm other families, I decided to create an archive page about the group and 
    Keith Raniere within the Ross Institute database. 

    20. The Ross Institute (TRI) is a nonprofit, tax-exempt organization devoted 
    to public education and research. TRTs mission is to study cults, destructive cults, 
    controversial groups and movements and to provide information easily accessible to the 
    public through the Internet for educational purposes, TRTs database includes news 
    stories, research papers, reports, court documents, book excerpts, personal testimonies 
    and hundreds of links to additional relevant resources, TRI provides free, public access 
    to its database through its Internet websites, www.rickross.com and www.cultnews.com . 

    21. The ESP archive page represents a very small fraction of TRTs database, 
    with only a few articles and reports, as well as a link to ESP's website. The TRI database 

    6 



    Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 20 of 79 

    SEP. 3. 2003 1 0:52AM MLTW NO. 138 P. 1 



    includes more than 250 archive pages and most are larger than the ESP/NXIVM page, 
    22. There is a disclaimer posted and/or linked prominently throughout the TRI 

    Web site and on the ESP page specifically that states: 

    The information within the Ross Institute archives has been collected to offer 
    the public a resource concerning groups called "cults," controversial 
    organizations and movements. 

    However* the mention and/or inclusion of a group or leader within 
    this archive does not define that group as a "cult" and/or an 
    individual mentioned as either destructive and/or harmful. Instead, 
    such inclusion simply reflects that archived articles and/or research is 
    available about a group or person that has generated some interest 
    and/or controversy. 

    All the information archived most be evaluated critically, through a 
    process of independent and individual judgment Please note that 
    there are links often prominently posted at the top of each individual 
    page to a group or movements own official website, which reflect 
    their views. It is important to see what they have to say. 
    Warning - All META tags, page titles, keywords and other content 
    descriptions used throughout this website are only intended to assist 
    search engines for research and locating purposes. This in no way, 
    shape or form Is intended to mislead anyone by implying any official 
    representation and/or relationship between this website and the 

    7 



    Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 21 of 79 

    SEP. 3. 2003 10:52AM MLTW NO, 138 P. 8 

    owners of any trademarks, service marks and/or copyrights, which 
    may contain the same keywords and/or titles. 
    The Ross Institute, its Advisory Board and/or Rick Ross do not 
    necessarily endorse or support any of the views expressed within the 
    documents, articles, reports and testimonies archived within this 
    website, with the exception of those specifically so attributed. 
    The Ross Institute, its Advisory Board and/or Rick Ross do not 
    necessarily endorse or support any of the views expressed within 
    linked websites listed at the Links page of this website. They are 
    provided only for the convenience of researchers and those concerned. 
    Books listed on the Books page of this website and the views they 
    express are not specifically endorsed by The Ross Institute, its 
    Advisory Board and/or Rick Ross, Readers must exercise their own 
    judgment in choosing and/or reviewing such material And then 
    critically evaluate any views or opinions the authors may express. 
    Again, some may find this material controversial The Ross Institute 
    has archived this information for the convenience of researchers and 
    those concerned. 

    Any minor child should consult their custodial parent(s) before 
    reading the information provided within this website. 
    The news items contained within this web site are provided without 
    profit by The Ross Institute and are intended to be available to 

    8 



    Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 22 of 79 

    SEP, 3. 2003 10:52AM MLTW NO. 138 P. 



    anyone interested in the topics included, for educational purposes 
    only. 

    Any publisher, Webmaster or news service (ie.» official and legal 
    holder of copyright) that objects to their material being included in 
    this archive may request that it be removed and/or that future 
    material be excluded. An official written request made by the 
    copyright holder and/or their legal representative will be honored/ 1 

    23 . The ESP archive page includes links to articles referencing the plaintiffs, 
    Keith Raniere* and a prior business venture of Mr. Raniere 3 as well as the previously 
    mentioned reports by doctors John Hochman and Paul Martin, copies of which are 
    attached to this Affidavit as Exhibits A, B and C, All of the reports include quotations 
    and references to various ESP materials, including materials from ESP's website and the 
    workbook, Both of these well respected and widely recognized experts made their 
    reports available through TRTs website in the public interest Neither I, nor TRI, nor the 
    doctors, received any "commercial benefit" through making these reports publicly 
    available through TRI's database. None of us are in competition with ESP, 

    24. In recent news stories, such as the Albany Times-Union or MSNBC, I 
    have responded factually about complaints received about ESP/NXTVM from families 
    and former participants called "Espians," I have also expressed genuine concern about 
    the potential risk these programs seem to pose. One complaint I received involved a 
    participant having a "breakdown" that required hospitalization. I understand that the 
    Keith Raniere, Nancy Salzman and their associates may not appreciate public discussion 



    Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 23 of 79 

    SEP, 3. 2003 1 0:52AM MLTW m m p 

    and/or criticism about their business practices. But I believe that 1 have the right and 
    responsibility to express my opinions and report concerns about their programs. 



    Signed under the pains and penalties of perjury thisgffife of August, 2003 





    JNOAK. WEST 
    Notary Public, Stats of New Jersey 

    ^ .No. 2227283 
    QusMMfflK-frftOourfy 
    CommMon Exp! u, My tJW - 



    10 



    Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 24 of 79 

    SEP. 3. 2003 10:53AM MLTW ■ NO. 138 "P. 



    Case l:03-ov-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 25 of 79 ' 

    SEP. 3. 2003 p 10:53AM tp MLTW ™ NO. 138 P. 12"! 



    A Forensic Psychiatrist Evaluates 
    ESP 

    February 2003 

    By John Hochman, M.D. 

    Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral 
    Sciences 

    University of California Los Angeles 
    Introduction 

    I have reviewed a manual for a 16 day, ten hours per day; large group awareness training called 
    "Executive Success Programs, " which also calls Itself "ESP." 

    I address the following questions: 

    1. Is mind control Involved in this training? 

    2. is the course curriculum "cult-like* in some way? 

    3. What negative effects or consequences might such a program produce? 

    I also viewed the ESP website. The website had a limited amount of material, some of which was 
    helpful to me in forming my opinions. 

    There is much in the content and format of ESP that is not at all original, and is quite similar to 
    aspects of a number of cults and cult-like organizations with which I am familiar. 

    Mind Control and the ESP Intensive 

    Mind control represents Indoctrination without informed consent It relies on calculated strategies 
    to mislead and to misinform. It particularly relies on emotional manipulation. 

    Long hours: A group using mind control will attempt to maximize the influence of group leaders 
    on participants, at the expense of any ongoing influence of friends and relatives. One way to 
    quickly effect this change is to maximize the amount of time that group participants are with group 
    leaders. ESP Intensive participants are signing up for sixteen ten-hour days, which will either be 
    experienced successively, or in five-day segments. Although three hours a day are allotted for 
    lunch and dinner breads as days go on. 

    Of further concern, the manual states In Italics, "We find our students don't want to leave at the 
    end of the dayr Since participants have been experiencing a day scheduled to start at 8 AM and 
    end at 10 PM, under usual circumstances, most participants would be tired and eager to go to see 
    friends and family, and get a night's rest to prepare for another long day starting at 8 AM. This 
    suggests to me that emotional appeals or other manipulation may occur to get everyone to stay 
    around even longer. 



    Limitations in ability to get feedback from friends and family! Participants are told to 
    promise not to tell non-participants of what they learn in the Intensive, as well as Its methods. 



    Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed' 11/25/03 Page 26 of 79 
    S A P : IMH^t Evffls ESP NO. 138 ^ P P^ 1 3 of 4 



    They will be unable to respond to routine questions they would be expected to receive, such as, 
    "What did you learn today? 11 or "What's going on at the seminar you are attending?" This serves as 
    to distance the participant from his ongoing relationships. It also serves to prevent the participant 
    from getting any feedback about what he is experiencing from people in the outside world, some of 
    whom care about the participant very much. 

    Secrecy; Participants are told to promise not to share with non-participants their recollection of 
    content or methods of the Intensive. Participants are mislead into feeling guilty for being a 
    "promise breaker" If they talk about their personal experiences over the course of many hours. This 
    effects a partial shutdown of communication with friends and family, and serves to strengthen a 
    common bond with the other secret-sharers. 

    Effect of idiosyncratic vocabulary on communication: Further communication s hutdown with 
    friends and family occurs as numerous English words are redefined to fit the peculiar meanings of 
    group leaders. The result is communications that are near Incomprehensible to outsiders (e.g.: The 
    mission of the human team is to build value and to uphold each other), This serves to embed the 
    participant into the group and Isolate him from outsiders. 

    Pre-emptive neutralization of criticism of the group by participants and their 
    family/friends early on; What the group calls "shifter strategies" is given much attention in the 
    Intensive. It Is clearly taught that these represent undesirable behaviors that should be met with 
    disapproval by other group members. Then end result is that if a participant criticizes things that 
    the group does, he is a "suppress! ve/* Since it is likely that group outsiders will perceive aspects of 
    the group's activities as "manipulative" or as a "cult," these two words are used as the sole 
    examples of "abstract terms" that a Shifter will use. The clear purpose of this didactic exercise by 
    the group Is to encourage participants to ignore friends and relatives who are likely to criticize the 
    group using these exact words. Finally, the Intensive attempts to Impart a sense of superiority to 
    participants simply for learning £splan theory ("Esplans understand the model, but non-Espians do 
    not"); such a sense of superiority would encourage participants to discourage criticism of their 
    activity from others. 

    Paramilitary ritual* and regalia; Paramilitary structure enhances the ability of leaders to control 
    participants through a "chain of command." [Keith Raniere] the leader's title as "Vanguard" is a 
    word with military origins, and participants are routinely expected to "thank" Vanguard at the end 
    of each and every session- One's rank in the group is constantly visible by scarf color and number 
    of stripes on the scarf, and this is reinforced by a ritual two-handed handshake where the higher 
    rank person's hands go on top. Advancement includes ability to be a "coach," which appears to be 
    a monitor, (sometimes-daily monitor), for members lower in rank. Clearly a submissive relationship 
    of sorts to one's superior in rank Is promoted. 

    Required daily contact with superiors is framed as personal growth: Since the paramilitary 
    regalia makes It clear who Is superior to who in rank, ongoing participants are required to make a 
    daily brief phone call to "check-in" with a "coach." Promotion to a higher level scarf cannot occur 
    without approval from one's coach, who becomes part of the group's eyes-and-ears to see if 
    participants are, for example, becoming suppressive, Moreover, promotion In this group is iced 
    over with the title of showing "persistence" to a "long-term commitment" Since dally checking in 
    like this is an unnatural thing to do for most grown-ups, any discomfort will most certainly be met 
    with the confrontation that they "need to be able to keep a long-term commitment." 

    Cult-Like Elements of the ESP Intensive 

    Pretensions to Science: In an attempt to Instant credibility in this era of technology triumphs, 
    this group describes its activities as "technology" and "science." (Other groups have done the same 
    in the past). Yet there is no evidence of any validation using scientific methods of anything the 
    group does* The group does make use of "pop psychology" theories, tips for greater efficiency, 
    gimmicks to impress others, and other notions that have already been widely publicized in 



    Case 1:03-gv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 27 of 79 
    SEP « 3 ; , 2003 r [0 53 AM is t E^ L _lW es NO. 1 38" jP^ 



    seminars and books over the decades - so this is hardly technology that the group can claim credit 
    for. The group also presents gross oversimplifications of psychological theory and of the human 
      condition (e.g.: rt AII anger Is created as a result of a conflict in values/) The group's leader may 
      have coined some maxims with a ring of truth, but again, this not science. 

      Unsubstantiated extravagant claims: As "proof" of the value of their "technology," the group 
      claims unprecedented results training over 400,000 individuals. Yet their website only comes up 
      with a few dozen testimonials. That's about one testimonial for every 10,000 participants. 



      Self-Serving Morality: Whether cult-like organizations claim to be religions, philosophies, etc, 
      each one has it's own self-created moral system, which is typically self-serving. The emphasis here 
      is on how violating the pledge involves the participant in hurting himself by telling others anything 
      about what he has been doing and learning for hours on end. The participant is counseled that to 
      tell others Is "compromising [his] Inner honesty and integrity/ There is no mention of how this 
      secrecy essentially benefits the group leaders, who are shielded from criticism from outsiders when 
      no one knows exactly what they are doing. 

      Messianic pretensions without discussing the obvious profit motives The mission of ESP is 
      to develop an integrated ethical framework of human experience to stop the destruction of value in 
      the world and move humanity forward to remove fear-based activities from the world/ ESP is 
      presented as a means of saving the world from "hunger, theft, dishonesty, envy and insecurity/ 
      After stating this, participants are urged to "pledge" to enroll people in ESP. Good intentions are 
      praise-worthy, but only to a point. Prior to the world being saved, the only guaranteed result of 
      recruitment and continued seminar enrollment Is up-front revenue generation. The fees are high, 
      and speak for themselves. Members are encouraged to advance In "rank," which requires, among 
      other things, more courses, which means more fees for ESP. 

      Self-coronation offenders: Participants are instructed to address the founder of ESP as 
      "Vanguard." The manual I reviewed implies he is the source of all the "technology" that the group 
      has, since no one else is mentioned. There appears to be no dissenting views, and his philosophies 
      are often presented In the third person plural "We believe." The ESP website suggests there Is now 
      a queen bee of sorts, as a Ms. Salzman, who was a Senior Proctor in this manual, as being 
      upgraded to be the group's sole "Prefect." All of this Is soft peddled to participants as analogous to 
      calling your dentist (who finished a universally recognised course of study) by the title "doctor." 

      Success in the Executive Success Program is about becoming a more thorough Esplan 
      and not an Executive: Although the program seems to promote skills so that participants could 
      become executives if they wished, the thrust of the program is clearly to get participants to spend 
      continuing hours taking ESP courses, signing up friends and family to attend seminars, gaining 
      scarf-status in the Espian world, adopting Esplan meanings to English words, etc. All of these 
      achievements are essentially irrelevant to goings on In the "real world/ Calling friends and 
      relatives to set up appointments to recruit them into ESP is presented to participants as the way to 
      practice getting "a real edge in relationships" and "impressing a special person," 



      Possible negative effects of the ESP Intensive 

      The ESP Intensive appears to be a gateway that encourages participants to attend further training 
      sessions or seminars, and get friends and family to do the same. In a general sense, the goal is 
      integration of individuals into a subculture - however, a particular kind of subculture. It is a 
      kingdom of sorts, ruled by a Vanguard, who writes his own dictionary of the English language, has 
      his own moral code, and the ability to generate taxes on subjects by having them participate in his 
      seminars. It Is a kingdom with no physical borders, but with psychological borders - influencing 
      how his subjects spend their time, socialize, and think. Increasing involvement serves to 
      Increasingly distance participants from their relationships in a manner that is slow and subtle, and 
      thus not at all obvious to them, 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 28 of 79 * 

      SEP. 3, 2003J0:54AM. C MLTW _ CD NO. 138 n P. 15. 



      Copyright © 2003 John Hochman, M.D. 
      To see more documents/articles regarding this group/organization/subject click here. 

























      1115333 ■FflFJTIMiftftI 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 29 of 79 

      SEP, 3. 2003 1 0:54AM MLTW wn m p 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 1 11/25/03 Peige30of79 1 



      Robert Jay Lifton's eight criteria of 
      thought reform as applied to the 
      Executive Success Programs 

      February 12, 2003 
      By Paul Martin, Ph.D. 
      Director of Wellspring Retreat 

      Note: Wellspring Retreat and Resource Center Is a licensed residential treatment facility that 
      provides a program of counseling and Instruction to victims of cultlc abuse, religious abuse and/or 
      thought reform. 



      1. Milieu Control 



      Control of communication within the group environment resulting in a 
      significant degree of isolation from the surrounding society. Includes 
      other techniques to restrict members 1 contact with outside world and 
      to be able to make critical, rational judgments about information: 
      overwork, busy-ness, multiple lengthy meetings, etc. Ufton: "The 
      most basic feature of the thought reform environment, the 
      psychological current upon which all else depends, is the control of 
      human communication. [This includes] not only the individual's 
      communication with the outside..., but also.,.his communication with 
      himself,.. [Tjhought reform participants may be in doubt as to who is telling what to whom, but the 
      fact that extensive information about everyone is being conveyed to the authorities is always 
      known..* Having experienced the impact of what they consider to be an ultimate truth..., they 
      consider it their duty to create an environment containing no more and no less than this 
      'truth/ [The group member] Is deprived of the combination of external Information and Inner 
      reflection which anyone requires to test the realities of his environment and to maintain a measure 
      of identity separate from it..." 



      Topics 



      X, Milieu Control 
      Mystical Manipulation 

      3. Demand for Purity 
      jLJhe Cult of Confession 

      5. The "Sacred Science" 

      6. Loading the Language 

      7. Doctrine Over Person 
      & pi$p$nsing of flen se 



      "Phone tree - Each new student will be assigned a Coach (a person of rank yellow or higher). The 
      Coach must not be the person who introduced the student to ESP. Each student will call the Coach, 
      without fail, on a schedule that is to the mutual benefit of the student and the Coach." 
      Rules and Regulations 
      12/2000 page 4 

      "All materials and information relating to ESP are to be kept in strict confidence. The ESP 
      information and materials are leased to the student for personal use only. They are not to be 
      shared, taught or In any way transmitted to anyone else for any purpose that is not approved by 
      ESP. Anyone needing or desiring this Information or materials must become a member of ESP." 
      Rules and Regulations 
      12/2000 page 4 

      "I will not speak of them, or In any way give others knowledge of them, outside ESP. Part of the 
      condition of being accepted into ESP is to keep all its information confidential." 
      12 Point Mission Statement 



      "Arranging for Coaching Support: 

      It Is your responsibility to set a time with your coach on a d?ily basis for check-in. The following 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 31 of 79 > 
      : !L! • 55«4ht offl of thought ntam as applied to the Executive ftJL'JL Pa£- J!f 12 



      rules apply; 

      a) Contacting, Students must speak to contact either by phone or in person daily. This Is known as 
      a contact session and Is done at a specified time (can be a time range). This time should be written 
      on the graph. Note: Messages left on answering machines DO NOT COUNT! 

      b) Exceptions. If necessary, the time may vary or days may be skipped only if it is arranged and 
      approved by the contact during the previous day's contact session. 

      c) Content* During contact session, student relays the progress of the persistence training and their 
      opinions about it, 

      Note; This call should not take more than 3 minutes." 

      Persistence 

      3/2001 page 1 

      "Concepts presented; 

      1) Deference between Faith and Trust 

      2) Everything we do is a matter of trust 

      3) All giving Is a form of trust 

      4) Money Is the element that allows trust to exist in the world 

      5) What gives money its value? 

      6) What It means If people believe that money is the root of all evil 

      7) Stages of dependence. Independence and interdependence 

      8) Having money brings out the True nature of people* 
      Money 

      7/2001 page 2 

      2. Mystical Manipulation 

      The claim of divine authority or spiritual advancement that allows the leader to reinterpret events 
      as he or she wishes, or make prophecies or pronouncements at will, all for the purpose of 
      controlling group members, Lifton: 'The inevitable next step after milieu control is extensive 
      personal manipulation.., Initiated from above, It seeks to provoke specific patterns of behavior and 
      emotion In such a way that these will appear to have arisen spontaneously from within the 
      environment... -Ideological totalists,..are impelled by a special kind of mystique which not only 
      justifies such manipulations, but makes them mandatory,.. They are the agents 'chosen 1 (by 
      history, by God, or by some other supernatural force) to carry out the 'mystical imperative/ the 
      pursuit of which must supersede all considerations of decency or of immediate human welfare, 
      Similarly, any thought or action which questions the higher purpose is considered to be stimulated 
      by a lower purpose, to be backward, selfish, and petty In the face of the great overriding mission,.. 
      At the level of the Individual person, the psychological responses to this manipulative approach 
      revolve about the basic polarity of trust and mistrust. One Is asked to accept these manipulations 
      on a basis of trust (or faith)... When trust gives way to mistrust... the higher purpose cannot serve 
      as adequate emotional sustenance. The individual then responds to the manipulations through 
      developing... the psychology of the pawn. Feeling himself unable to escape from forces more 
      powerful than himself, he subordinates everything to adapting himself to them, He becomes 
      sensitive to all kinds of cues, expert at anticipating environmental pressures, and skillful in riding 
      them in such a way that his psychological energies merge with the tide rather than turn painfully 
      against himself. This requires that he participate actively in the manipulation of others, as well as 
      in the endless round of betraysls and self-betrayals which are required. But whatever his 
      response, „he has been deprived of the opportunity to exercise his capacities for self-expression 
      and independent action." 

      [Please see examples under "Sacred Science/ In addition, the idea of the white sash has to not be 
      a suppressive person implies the active manipulation of others - the reporting on others - that they 
      must be loyal to the cause of ESP.] 



      3. Demand for Purity 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 32 of 79 1 
      S IL 1 JiJ 3 Li^ A Hght cSSi of thought reform as apptfed to the Executive SucEAlL Pa** J If 12 



      The world is viewed as black and white and group members are constantly exhorted to strive for 
      perfection. Consequently, guilt and shame are common and powerful control devices. Ufton: "In 
      the thought reform milieu, as In all situations of Ideological totalism, the experiential world is 
      sharply divided Into the pure and the impure, into the absolutely good and the absolutely evil. The 
      good and the pure ere of course those Ideas, feelings, and actions which are consistent with the 
      totallst ideology and policy; anything else Is apt to be relegated to the bad and the impure... The 
      philosophical assumption underlying this demand is that absolute purity,. .is attainable... .,.[B]y 

      defining and manipulating the criteria of purity, and then by conducting an all-out war upon 
      impurity, the Ideological totalists create a narrow world of guilt and shame. This Is perpetuated by 
      an ethos of continuous reform, a demand that one strive permanently and painfully for something 
      which not only does not exist but fs In fact alien to the human condition... ...Each person is made 

      vulnerable through his profound inner sensitivities to his own limitations and to his unfulfilled 
      potential... [I.e.,] his existential guilt.,, ,^e individual thus comes to apply the same to^ist 
      potarteatlonxjf food and«vift&t^ character... He must also look upon his 

      impurities as originating from outside influences [0]nce an Individual person has experienced 

      the totalist polarization of good and evil, he has great difficulty In regaining a more balanced inner 
      sensitivity to the complexities of human morality..." 

      "I pledge to purge myself of all parasite and envy-based habits and replace them with the habits of 
      effort and interdependence." 
      12 Point Mission Statement 

      "It Is believed that how something Is said Is more Important In the transmission of an Idea than in 
      the actual words used. In fact, a study conducted by Robert BIrdwistle at the University of 
      Pennsylvania stated that 93% of all communication is non-verbal. Enthusiastic people are better 
      able to communicate and even sell their Ideas with ease. They are more successful. The ablflty to 
      access and utilize and excited state, at will, is a skill that can greatly simplify the road to success. 
      When you have mastered this module, you will have the magic button." 
      Building an Excited State 
      3/2001 page 1 

      "Homework: 

      Lifeline of tribute: Make a list of all of your positive and negative traits in your journal. Go through 
      your list and do the tribute process on all of your traits giving tribute to those people and traits that 
      make you who you are. 

      Practice giving tribute whenever you're In a position to do so. TlVmk of 3 examples in your life 
      where you could give tribute. How can you remind yourself to appreciate all the gifts you have as a 
      result of the work of others on a daily basis?" 
      The Fifth Integration 

      "Rules and Rituals 

      1. Sashes and Scarves 

      2. Promotion 

      3. Stripes 

      4. Pictures of founders 

      5. Shoes 

      6. Explanation of Bowing 

      7. Stand when high rank enters 

      8. Explanation of Recitation of Mission - the repetition of this statement brings even deeper 
      meaning to the purpose of ESP. 

      9. Phone tree 

      10. Confidentiality and Materials 

      11. Attire - Standard business attire is required during all ESP sessions [missihg page] 

      18. Handshakes 

      19. ESP Handshake 



      . Case 1:03tOv-00976-GLS^DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 33 of 79 1 
      L E LiJi Ll°4 5 - A iW crL T i of thought reform as applied to the Executive Suc&LlL p£ . 2 Sf 12 



      20- End of session handshake line-up" 
      Rules and Rituals 
      12/2000 pages 2, 3, 4, 6 

      "AH materials and information relating to ESP are to be kept in strict confidence. Students are 
      bound to this as a condition of becoming a member of ESP," 
      Rules and Rituals 
      12/2000 page 4 

      "It is Important that students take pride in their appearance and become accustomed (if they are 
      not already) to wearing standard business attire." 
      Rules and Rituals 
      12/ 2QQ msB A 

      "Outside Practice: Be sure to shake hands with everyone you meet. Pay particular attention to your 
      dominant foot and notice how It feels." 
      Rules and Rituals 
      12/2000 page 8 

      "Create a chart of all of the activities you do in a week and rate them from 0% (lowest intensity) - 
      100% (full intensity), it is helpful to break down your levels In divisions of 5%, Once you become 
      aware of your average intensity levels, you can begin to increase or decrease them depending on 
      your goal. 

      To practice: Do one activity a day like your life depends on it, even If It's only for a few seconds, 

      Finding the switch: Allowing yourself to let go of control and move into fight or flight requires 

      turning off the control switch that we usually utilize in everyday life. This is very different, as it 

      requires a shift Into another type of brain function, a lower more primitive functioning. It is usually 

      necessary to practice finding the switch for several days to develop the ability to use it on 

      demand." 

      Intensity 

      12/2000 page 3 

      "Contacting. Students must speak to contact either by phone or in person daily. This is known as a 
      contact session and is done at a specified time (can be a time range). This time should be written 
      on the graph. Note: Messages left on answering machines DO NOT COUNTI" 
      Persistence 
      5/2001 page I 

      "Make a list of 8 of your personal values, Be sure to ask the question again and again until you 
      have a Ust of at least 8 answers. It is important for you to ask yourself this question several times 
      because many times our most important values are not Immediately obvious to us." 
      Work and Value 
      5/2001 page 2 

      "Skills/Concepts Presented; 

      1. Definitions 

      2. Listing and defining my personal values 

      3. Difference between a right and a privilege 

      4 f What makes human beings different than animals? 

      5. What is a slave? 

      6. Intellectual contribution vs, physical contribution 

      7. What Is valuable? 

      8. What makes something more or less valuable? 

      9. Virtual work 



      Case liOS-cv-OCaTe-GLS'DRH Document 71 Filerfll/25/03 Pelge34of79 ' 
      - E Li,?2.S ll-^Mght ci T «. of thought rata m applied to the Executive SncB Jil. hi. iif 



      10. What Is work? 

      11. Why are we here, mankind's work?" 
      Work and Value 

      5/2001 page 4 

      "Completing the worksheet is essential in converting perceived needs and desires into preferences. 
      This process will free you from addictive desires and give you the ability to be more consistent." 
      Honesty and Disclosure 
      6/2001 page 2 

      4. The Cult of Confession 

      Serious (and often not so serious) sins, as defined by the group, are to be confessed, either 
      privately to a personal monitor or publicly to the group at large, Ufton: "Confession is carried 
      beyond its ordinary religious / legal, and therapeutic expressions to the point of becoming a cult in 
      Itseff. There is the demand that one confess to crimes one has not committed, to sinfulness that is 
      artificially induced, in the name of a cure that is arbitrarily imposed. Such demands are made 
      possible not only by the ubiquitous human tendencies toward guilt and shame but also by the need 
      to give expression to these tendencies. In totalist hands, confession becomes a means of 
      exploiting, rather than offering solace for, these vulnerabilities. The assumption underlying total 

      exposure,., is the environment's claim to total ownership of each Individual self within it [TJhe 

      cult of confession makes it virtually impossible to attain a reasonable balance between worth and 
      humility,,, 

      "Upon completion of the Mission Statement, all recite, 'Thank you Vanguard 1 as tribute to its 
      author." 

      Rules and Rituals 
      12/2000 page 4 

      "Phone Tree - Each student will call his or her Coach at least twice a week. Students involved In the 
      more advanced aspects of ESP will speak to their Coaches at least once a day." 
      Rules and Rituals 
      12/2000 page 4 

      "When working with Individuals there are 4 projective questions to Include in your Exploration of 
      Meaning: 

      1. Blow their cover! - Invitations to project and reveal self: 

      a) What's a person like when they're (x)? 

      b) Who do you know who is (x), describe them.., 

      c) Think of an incident when someone was (x), what were they like? 

      d) Tell me of a time when you (someone) were/was (x)? This also gets more meaning! 

      2. Project out the details! - Getting more data: 

      a) How do you know when they're (x)? 

      b) Imitate someone who is (x).,. 

      c) Teach me how to be (x).,. 

      d) What would you need to be like/have to be to be the projected person? 

      e) How do you think they feel? 

      f) How would you/they feel In the future/past state if you/they were (x)? 

      3. Finding the direct projection! - This question elicits their values, to get it ask yourself, 'Why 
      would they go there now? 1 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 35 of 79 
      SEP, 3. 2 00 3 L: 10:56 AM^ or M L JW L ojf thoxoght reform as applied to tfae JExeoutiw Swc^L^l . J 2 f j ^ 



      a) Why is that important to you/them? 

      b) What would happen (it be like) If that wasn't/didn't happen? (was no x) 

      c) How would your/their life change if you/they had (x)? 

      d) How would the past have been different if you/they had (x)? 

      4, Get the Inner Deficiency! This question gives you a direct answer to the inner deficiency: 

      a) What do you/they get out of it? 

      b) What would happen if you/they didn't (x)?" 

      Projective Questions 'for Facifitetons 

      "Find an example in your fife when you copied and did not give trttoute, Apologize but loud for the 
      group to the person who you copied from and verbalize the benefit you received from copying." 
      The Fifth Integration 

      "Have you ever considered why people have the need to blame others, justify or simply be right? 
      Have you ever found yourself needing to prove to another individual that you were justified in your 
      actions? What is this behavior about and why do we expend so much energy on these stories? How 
      do blame and responsibility affect each other? This practice session will answer these questions and 
	give you a whole new understanding of the state of responsibility." 
	Blame and Responsibility 
	3/2001 page 1 

	"Personal values are expressed in abstract concepts that have a different meaning to everybody. 
	Some examples of values would be concepts like success, satisfaction, achievement, family, 
	education, etc. Each person has a different perception of the concept of 'success.' Defining these 
	terms helps us understand ourselves better. 

	Make a list of 8 of your personal values. This is done by asking yourself one of the following 
	questions; 

	1) 'Why is (x) important to me (job, career, or relationship, personal or professional development 
	or achievement)?' 

	2) 'What's important In my work, relationship, career, personal or professional development, etc., 
	what must be there?" 'What Is Important to me about succeeding?' 

	Work and Value 
	5/2001 page 2 

	"Is it possible for us to have total honesty with others? Is full disclosure a good thing or a bad 
	thing? How do we stay in integrity with others and ourselves so that we can build sound 
	relationships personally and professionally? How do our needs and desires Interfere with our ability 
	to have what we really want in life? This module will help you answer these questions and change 
	the way you relate to others in surprisingly positive ways." 
	Honesty and Disclosure 
	6/2001 page 1 

	"Homework; Find someone whom you trust and want to be close to. Get agreement and start by 
	disclosing the things you discover about your filters and values. Have your partner do the same 
	thing. This will help you begin to learn about each other's filters and values, creating the basis for 
	very special relationships. Remember; Knowing our filters helps us to be consistent in our behavior 
	patterns." 

	Honesty and Disclosure 
	6/2001 page 1 



	"A tribute to the Negative Habit: 



	Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Pdge36of79 1 
} 1L J: 15$ A J?ght cr. M i T i of thought reform as applied to the Executive Sued?. L 3 A , 2 cif 12 



Each student to tell the group: 

1) The benefit of this habit to their survival. The student should feel free to use a real life example. 

2) The drawbacks of this habit 

3) A positive habit that gives the same benefits without the drawbacks 

4) A thank-you to the habit for the benefit it has given and a pledge to now replace this habit with 
the new up-dated beneficial habit through ESP and other endeavors," 

Tribute - the 5th Integration 
7/2001 page 5 

"Are you aware of examples when you did not give tribute (stolen) In the past so that you will be 
more conscious in the future?* 
Tribute - the 5th Integration 
7/2001 page 6 

5. The "Sacred Science" 

The doctrine of the group is considered the ultimate Truth, beyond all questioning or disputing. The 
leader of the group is likewise above criticism as the spokesperson fbr<Sod on earth. Ufton: The 
totallst milieu contains an aura of sacredness around Its basic dogma, holding It out as an ultimate 
moral vision for the ordering of human existence. This sacredness is evident in the prohibition 
(whether or not explicit) against the questioning of basic assumptions, and In the reverence which 
Is demanded for the originators of the Word, the present bearers of the Word, and the Word Itself. 
While thus transcending ordinary concerns of logic, however, the milieu at the same time makes an 
exaggerated claim of airtight logic, of absolute 'scientific' precision. Thus the ultimate moral vision 
becomes an ultimate science; and the man who dares to criticize it, or to harbor even unspoken 
alternative ideas, becomes not only immoral and Irreverent, but also 'unscientific/ ..The 
assumption here is not so much that man can be God, but that man's ideas can be God.,. At the 
level of the individual, the totallst sacred science can offer much comfort and security. Its appeal 
lies in its seeming unification of the mystical and the logical modes of existence... For within the 
framework of the sacred science, there is room for both careful step-by-step syllogism, and 

seeping, non-rational 'Insights. 1 - [S]o strong a hold can the sacred science achieve over his 

mental processes that If one begins to feel himself attracted to ideas which either contradict or 
ignore it, he may become guilty and afraid, His quest for knowledge is consequently hampered.,." 

"Handshaking is a sign of respect and affords us an opportunity to make direct physical contact 
» with others. We believe that many of society's problems have developed because people have 

come to view each other as objects rather than human beings. The handshake is a way to greet 
others in every professional and personal context and is a sign of respect in ESP. Here In ESP, we 
use a two handed handshake. This conveys warmth and a sense of community. Placement of the 
left hand denotes rank. Individuals of higher rank place their left hand on the top. Individuals of 
the same rank shake vertically. Lower rank places the left hand on the bottom. 

Purpose: To introduce students to the rules and rituals so that they will develop a deep 
appreciation and understanding of ESP. 

Definitions: 

Crux of the hand is the portion of the hand between the thumb and forefinger, where they form a 
right angle, Wrist cock refers to the angle of the wrist, which can be used to gain control of the 
handshake. It Is Important for control to cock the wrist slightly down as you move into the 
handshake. Positioning of the feet determines dominance. Stepping into the handshake with the 
right foot creates a more dominant position, expressing strength for the hand-shaker, Stepping 
into the handshake with the left foot, will be perceived by both people as a more passive 
expression. The middle and ring fingers are used to gain control of the handshake." 
Rules and Rituals - Segment 1 Handshaking 
12/2000 page 1 



Case l:03-dv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 37 of 79 



"Sashes or Scarves - Students are introduced to the school and presented with sashes at their first 

official practice session, after Rules and Rituals. Each student shall wear an official ESP neck sash 

or scarf." 

Rules and Rituals 

12/2000 page 2 

"The ESP information and materials are /eased to the student for personal use only. They are not to 
be shared, taught or in any way transmitted to anyone else for any purpose that is not approved 
by ESP." 

Rules and Rituals 
12/2000 page 4 

"Since most adults have been uslnfl parasite strategies aJJ of their lives successful, they may see 
no reason to change them now." 
Parasite/Producer III - Practice 
12/2000 page 1 

"Student Notes; 

What is the mission of our school? How does understanding ESP's integrated matrix help us 
determine destructive patterns of human behavior and give us clues as to what is to come? We are 
now at the highest level of technological advancement in human history. The lifestyle current 
technology affords us has never existed before on the planet, Human civilization has had rises and 
falls for centuries; yet It Is our belief humanity cannot survive another fell. All members of the 
human team must understand the historical reasons behind this tendency so we can change it and 
survive, We believe this is the ultimate cause because It means our existence and all other causes 
and our existence depend on this knowledge. The mission of ESP Is to develop an integrated ethical 
framework of human experience to stop the destruction of value in the world and move humanity 
forward. This practice session explains ESP's mission and gives students a clear knowledge of how 
and why we need to act to change historical trends." 
Mission 

3/2001 page 1 

"It is one of ESP's goals to remove fear-based activities from the world. When people act from an 
ethical foundation/ they are not afraid of the consequences of their actions." 
Mission - Important Points 
3/2001 page 1 

"ESP's hypothesis: Business and entrepreneurial spirit were human inventions and noble 
achievements but to shifters the very thing that made them exceptional hurt them In their gut, 
Because shifters cheat they win any game they play. Their buts [guts?- ed«] work like Geiger 
counters bringing them to the noblest pursuits, In this case business. Because they cheat, they 
dfmb to the top of the game and destroy it." 
Mission - Important Points 
3/2001 page 1 

"In the field of psychology the phrase, 'Perception is projection' is commonly used, but untli now 
there has never been a concise explanation of how this complex process works." 
The Face of the Universe - Projection 
3/2001 

"Vanguard has provided us with something that no other mode! could, In this practice you gain a 
full understanding of what self-esteem is, how people inadvertently lower it and how to raise your 
own self-esteem and the self-esteem of others." 
Self- Esteem 
3/2001 page 1 



Case l:03*ov-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 38 of 79 1 
s iLi mmi^ rfJIof thouthtrefoma, «pplied to ft. Executive SvuhEIE. Pa£. )ltl2 



"Ethics are well formed consistent postulates by which we live, An ethics is an internal guide, 
something that we have personally derived from our experience and is personal to us. Sometimes 
ethics are rules that we have internalized. Example: Thou shall not kill, rt 
Crime and Punishment 
3/20O1 page 1 

M What we all need is to wipe the slate clean and start to build the inner knowledge of our world 
from scratch. This should be done privately, without coercion, pressure or unrealistic expectations. 
How is this possible in a world where our commitments are demanded daily? This module shows 
you how so that you may possess an untarnished, fully powerful way of causing your desires to 
become reafity through commitment and persistence." 
Persistence 
5/2001 page 1 

"This practice session will give you a dear definition of work, an appreciation of civilization and 
what It has given us, humankind's purpose, and our own value in the world." 
Work and Value 
5/2001 page 1 

"All of us are born parasitic or dependent on others for our survival. The hope is that as we grow 
we will learn effort strategies, which will enable us to become independent. Some people never 
make this transition and most people only make it partially. It Is Impossible to grow up without 
utilizing any parasite strategies. Unfortunately, all inappropriate taking lowers our self-esteem. In 
order to raise our self-esteem, we must rid ourselves of as many parasite strategies as possible. 
Once taught, most people can recognize them easily. To become successful It Is necessary to notice 
these patterns in ourselves and make a conscious effort to change them." 
Parasite/Producer Module II - strategies 
7/2001 page 1 

M As you retake the practice sessions, the demonstration of your understanding of concepts will 
greatly benefit the class." 
Tribute - the 5th Integration 
7/2001 page 6 

6. Loading the Language 

The group develops a jargon In many ways unique to itself, often not understandable to outsiders. 
This jargon consists of numerous words and phases which the members understand (or think they 
do), but which really act to dull one's ability to engage in critical thinking. Lifton: The language of 
  the totalist environment is characterized by the thought-terminating cliche. The most far-reaching 
  and complex of human problems are compressed into brief, highly reductive, definitive-sounding 
  phrases, easily memorized and easily expressed. These become the start and finish of any 
  Ideological analysis... Totalist language, then, Is repetitiously centered on all-encompassing jargon, 
  prematurely abstract, highly categorical, relentlessly judging, and to anyone but its most devoted 
  advocate, deadly dull: in Lionel Trilling's phrase, 'the language of nonthought,'..." 

  "All parasitic strategies lower self-esteem, and therefore, destroy value." 
  Parasite/Producer III - Practice 
  12/2000 page l 

  "Most people (non-Espians) who use parasite patterns are unaware that they are doing something 
  harmful (harmful because it lowers self-esteem)/' 
  Parasite/Producer III - Practice 
  12/2000 page 1 



  . Case l:03-cv-00976-GLSJDRH Docuntent71 Filed" 11/25/03 Petge39of79 * 
  SEP,!, mm^-m «*t3S offtake »fo» m wlied to the Executive Suc&A 3 .? Pag!' Jk 



  "Cult - this Is a label that conveys no meaning but devalues the group. It is designed to keep 
  people away from the group without saying what is wrong with it. Example: That's a cult/ 

  Strategy Name: 'Counter culture/ Response; 'What specifically makes the group a cult? 1 Or, r What 
  do you mean by cult?' 'What do they do that's wrong? 1 Key: The dictionary definition Is a system of 
    religious beliefs and rituals/ 1 
    Parasite/Producer III - Practice 
    12/2000 page 6 

    "Motivational States: These are the emotional states that move people to become interested and 
    excited enough to take action. There are two directions in which human beings can focus their 
    energy and attention to drive motivation. They focus on and move towards goals or objectives, or 
    they focus on and move away from problems or perceived consequences, 

    Desire State: This is a motivational state that can be accessed at will to drive motivation. It Is a 
    'toward 1 state, - 

    Toward: These patterns focus directly on goals and objectives. When people are utilizing towards 
    patterns, their effort and attention moves them to have, get, obtain and achieve something as a 
    result of desire. 

    Away From: These patterns focus directly on identifying circumstances to avoid, and problems that 
    need solving. People who are utilizing circumstances to avoid, and problems that need solving, 
    People who are utilizing away from patterns focus energy on what should be avoided, gotten rid of 
    or not happen. Threats and fear energize them, 

    Trigger: A stimulus-response mechanism that starts a behavioral pattern Is a trigger. In this 
    context, the trigger Is the internal Image, word or sound; external event or stimulus that happens 
    that causes the emotional state to occur, It Is Important to identify the trigger so that it can be 
    used to bring back the emotional state, in this case, the motivated state at will. 

    Key Elements: This is the exact set of physiological components that make up and trigger the 

    emotional state of a person/' 

    Motivation, Building Desire - Definitions 3/2001 page 1 

    "Cult: Using the term as a way of devaluing a group that Is doing nothing wrong. It puts 
    unsubstantiated doubt in the minds of non-critfeal thinking people and creates doubt," 
    Shifter 

    7/2001 page 2 

    "All of us have copied at some time in our lives/ 
    Tribute - the 5th Integration 
    7/2001 page i 

    7. Doctrine Over Person 

    The personal experiences of the group members are subordinated to the "Truth" held by the group- 
    -apparently contrary experiences must be denied or re-interpreted to fit the doctrine of the group. 
    The doctrine is always more important than the individual. Ufton; "This sterile language reflects 
    another characteristic feature of Ideological totallsm: the subordination of human experience to the 
    Claims of doctrine... [W]hen the myth becomes fused with the totalist sacred science, the resulting 
    'logic 1 can be so compelling and coercive that it simply replaces the realities of Individual 
    experience, Consequently, past historical events are retrospectively altered, wholly rewritten, or 
    Ignored, to make them consistent with the doctrinal logic... The same doctrinal primacy prevails in 
    the totalist approach to changing people: the demand that character and Identity be reshaped, not 



    Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 40 of 79 
    S 1 P : . i ?00 hit£l k hht c^ili of thought reform as applied to the Executive SuaSLL 3 .? *agt" > I if 12 



    In accordance with one's special nature or potentialities/ but rather to fit the rigid contours of the 
    doctrinal moid... The underlying assumption is that the doctrine-including its mythological 
    elements-is ultimately more valid, True, and real than is any aspect of actual human character or 
    human experience. Thus, even when circumstances require that a totallst movement follow a 
    course of action in conflict with or outside the doctrine, there exists [a need to erect] an elaborate 
    fagade of new rationalizations designed to demonstrate the unerring consistency of the doctrine 
    and the unfailing foresight which it provides... Rather than modify the myth In accordance with 
    experience, the will to orthodoxy requires Instead that men be modified In order to reaffirm the 
    myth... ...The totalist environment... counters. ./deviant' tendencies with the accusation that they 

    stem entirely from personal 'problems'... derived from untoward earlier... Influences,, 

    INo examples,] 

    8. Dispensing of Existence 

    The group arrogates to Itself the prerogative to decide who has the right to exist and who does not. 
    Usually held non-literally, this means that those outside the group are unspiritual, worldly, satanlc, 
    "unconscious," or whatever, and that they must be converted to the ideas of the group or they will 
    be lost. If they refuse to join the group, then they must be rejected by the group members, even If 
    they are family members. In rare cases this concept gives the group the right to terminate the 
    outsider's life. Ufton: "The totalist environment always draws a sharp line between those whose 
    right to existence can be recognized, and those who possess no such right... [0]ne underlying 
    assumption makes this arrogance mandatory: the conviction that there Is just one path to True 
    existence, just one valid mode of being, and that all others are perforce invalid and False... For the 
    individual, the polar emotional conflict is the ultimate existential one of 'being versus nothingness, 1 
    He is likely to be drawn to a conversion experience, which he sees as the only means of attaining a 
    path of existence for the future... The totallst environment., thus stimulates in everyone a fear of 
    extinction or annihilation... A person can overcome this fear and find,-, 'confirmation, 1 not in his 
    individual relationships, but only from the fount of all existence, the totalist Organization. Existence 
    comes to depend upon creed (I believe, therefore I am), upon submission (I obey, therefore I am) 
    and beyond these, upon a sense of total merger with the ideological movement. Ultimately of 
    course one compromises and combines the totalist 'confirmation 1 with Independent elements of 
    personal identity; but one Is ever made aware that, Should he stray too far along this 'erroneous 
    path/ his right to existence may be withdrawn." 

    "All materials and information relating to ESP are to be kept in strict confidence. They are essential 
    assets of ESP acquired at great time and expense. The unauthorized use of them is strictly 
    prohibited, constitutes theft and will cause irreparable harm/ 
    Rules and Regulations 
    12/2000 page 4 

    "Remember that Espians understand the model but non-Espians do not" 
    Parasite/Producer III - Practice 
    12/2000 page 1 

    Note: Paul Martin Is the Director of Wellsprina_Retreat and a licensed clinical psychologist. 
    Wellspring is a nonprofit residential treatment facility, which was founded in 1986. Located near 
    Albany, Ohio the retreat offers care, education and counseling to the victims of cults, religious 
    abuse, coercive persuasion and/or thought reform programs. It is a nonprofit corporation staffed 
    by credentlaled mental health professionals, 

    Copyright © 2003 Paul Martin, Ph.D. 
    To see more documents/articles regarding this group/organlzation/subjeef clickJhere . 



    Case l:03-cv-00976-G LS-DR H Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 41 of 79 
    SEP.. 3 J00%J.? - 5? A J!!tfit chilli of fhoiigbt nftnm u wlted to 1fae Bawoattve SiwSi- 1 !? J&f 12 




    Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 42 of 79 

    SEP, 3. 2003 1 0:59AM MLTW no, 138 p, 29 




    Case l:03,cv-00976-GLS^DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 43 of 79 

    SEP, 3, 2003 1 0:59AM., -MLTW. c _ _ NO. 138 „P. 30 rA 

    uiu^i nncu/oi» ui the iw,wtive Success Programs Inc. ■ P& sw I of 9 



    A Critical Analysis of the Executive 
    Success Programs Inc. 

    February 12, 2003 
    By Paul Martin/ Ph.D. 
    Director of Wellspring Retreat 

    Note: Wellspring Retreat & Resource Center is a licensed residential treatment facility that provides 
    a program of counseling end instruction to victims of cuitic abuse, religious abuse and/or thought 
    reform. 

    Executive Success Programs Inc. by Keith Raniere is a series of high intensity high demand work 
    shops that are designed to "actualize human potential" 1 A selection of promotional material dated 
    1/30/2001, entitled "Executive Success Programs. Inc, (ESP) W reads, "Our School is designed to 

    change the way people think, make decisions, react, and perform In various [areas?] of life All 

    of ESP's programs are designed to help Individuals develop the emotional and intellectual skills 
    necessary to reach their maximum potential In all areas of life. Rational Inquiry is a science based 
    on the belief that the more consistent a person Is In their thinking, the more successful the 
    individual will be." 

    In the same promotional sheet, there is a paragraph entitled "Why should I so this7" - meaning 
    why should a person take ESP? Raniere writes, "Ail adults have disintegrations because when we 
    were children learning to be adults and learning about the world our perspective was based on the 
    perception, intellect, and wisdom of a small child. These lessons become the foundation of our 
    whole adult reality. There has never been vehicle in our society that allowed us to go through and 

    re-examine these beliefs and re-incorporate them now from an adult perspective until now. 

    Rational Inquiry is that vehicle. It is the systematic introspective science that provides us with the 
    necessary tools for human transformation," 

    A key motto of ESP is "We Teach everything nobody else teaches..." and everything they do 2 ESP 
    claims that students will reach "their full potential" with the program. 2 _Raniere claims to have 
    devised a ''radical new technology to create an unprecedented success program. It is a total 
    personal and professional development system." 4 

    ESP can be further defined by looking at the 12 Point Mission Statement of ESP.^The first point ls f 
    "Success is an internal state of clear, honest knowledge of what I am - my value in the world and 
    rny responsibility for the way I react to all things." The second point is, "There are no ultimate 
    victims, therefore, I will not choose to be a victim/ 1 The Information gleaned from ESP seminars is 
    to be kept confidential. There is a pledge to purge oneself of all parasite and envy based habits. 
    There is a pledge to control as much of the money of the world as possible within each student's 
    success plan. In fact, it is essential for the survival of the world for as much money of the world to 
    be controlled by ethtcal people - by implication, graduates of ESP. The mission statement says, "A 
    world of successful people will be people a better world indeed a world devoid of hunger, theft, 
    dishonesty, envy and insecurity- People will no longer try to destroy each other steal from each 
    other down each other or rejoice at another's demise. Success ethics and integrity are co- 
    insplrational. I pledge to share and enroll people in ESP and Its mission for myself and to help 

    make the world a better place to live." 5 



    In a workshop session called "Mission," the reader is further enlightened as to the purposes of ESP, 



    » Case l:03-cv-00976-GLSiDRH Document 71 Filecf 11/25/03 Page 44 of 79 i 
    S „3^ 2 00 Arl^59 A *tf» ^JJJidva Success Programs Inc. NO. 138 , p P^3J of 9 



    How does understanding ESP'S integrated matrix help us determine destructive patterns of human 
    behavior and give us clues as to what is to come? We are now at the highest level of technological 
    advancement In human history. The lifestyle current technology affords us has never existed before 
    on the planet. Human civilization has had rises and falls for centuries; yet, ft Is our belief humanity 
    cannot survive another fall. All members of the human team must understand the historic reasons 
    behind this tendency so we can change it and survive. We believe this is the ultimate cause 
    because It means our existence and all other causes and our existence depend on this- knowledge. 
    The Mission of ESP is to develop an integrated ethicai framework of human experience to stop the 
    destruction of value in the world and move humanity forward. This practice session explains ESP's 
    mission and gives students a clear knowledge of how and why to act to change historic trends^ 

    ESP Training is offered through workshops called n lntensives," s The term "Intensive" Is fairly 
    common in the human potential movement to describe their training courses, iSP Intenslves are 
    offered as a three day or weekend, 5-Day, or 16-Day Intensive. The 16-Day course starts at 8 am 
    to 9 pm dally with lunch and dinner breaks and breaks, Tuition cost is $7500.00 or $6000.00 if paid 
    two weeks in advance. Full tuition must be paid first dsy of class. 

    The 5-Day Intensive, Cost is $2700.00. Pre-reglstratlon discount is $2160.00. Full amount must be 
    paid two weeks before class resumes. Class hours are the same as those for the 16-Day Intensive, 

    The 3-Day Intensive: Friday 4-10, Saturday, 8 AM to 9 PM, Sunday 9 AM to 6 PM. Tuition 
    $1200.00, Full tuition must be paid two weeks before Intensive starts, 

    There is also an Ethos Training for Coaches and Coach Apprentices. This program appears to be 
    offered beyond the 16 day intensives. There are several levels of lengths of enrollment and the 
    cost varies according to time of enrollment from 3 to 12 months and from $800 to $1800. There is 
    a full refund guarantee for those signing up for the one year Ethos program If students are not 
    satisfied. 

    Students also are required to wear sashes which signify rank. A white sash reflects student status, 
    stripes reflect levels of certification and practice. Yellow sashes are worn by an Apprentice 
    Coach/Coach. Having one stripe signifies a True coach. Two or Three Stripes indicate more 
    advanced and experienced coaches. Three stripes is an active contributor. Four stripes indicates 
    "Full Integration facilitated," Orange Sash: Apprentice Proctor/Proctor. Coach Certification II, 
    Orange Sash is the highest sash rank. s 

    ESP Intensives then lay out the mechanics of how the student is to achieve all the success 
    promised by ESP. This process is accomplished through a series of topics presented during the 
    "Intensive" sessions,. Raniere places great emphasis on the psychological concept of projection. 
    However, according to ESP "until now there has never been a concise explanation of how this 
    complex process works. nia The Intensive includes the three stages of human evolution in which, 
    according to Raniere, human beings are born parasitic, unable to take care of themselves, they 
    depend on others for their very survival." As adults parasite strategies, "keep people dependent on 
    others and lower self esteem. f,li Many examples of parasite behavior are presented, such as 
    complaining about pain and suffering, saying, "I'm hungry/ "I know I promised but I had no idea 
    how hard or painful this was going to be." The point here according to ESP is that parasites try to 
    avoid responsibility simply because they tried so hard,^ 

    The program spells out a new version of "Good and Bad." Here Is a sampling from the workshop 

    When we were little children, we learned "bad" when someone yelled "No!" or 'That's bad, Stop!" 
    We learned "good" when we were rewarded In some way, This sort of learning Is Inconsistent and 
    limiting - because in order to have a foil understanding of each concept, we would have to examine 
    every example of good and every example of bad, This practice session affords you the opportunity 



    ' Case liOS-cv-OC^S-GLS^DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 45 of 79 



    to re-eva!uete your definitions of these vital concepts to form a solid foundation for the future. 11 

    In the course of the program normal terms such as good and bad are redefined. Good becomes pro 
    survival, and bad counter survival or destructive of value. Rules according to ESP are fear based 
    and ethics are Internalized, 

    ESP then adds the element of a motivational track where students are taught and practice certain 
    motivational states such as "Toward" which is patterns that "focus directly on goals and objectives. 
    When people are utilizing toward patterns, their effort and attention moves them to have, get, 
    obtain and achieve something asa result of desire." 14 



    Other concepts covered In the motivation section Include, "Ayyay From^ 

    directly oh circumstances to" avoFd,....*; ^trigger," " a stimulus response mechanism used to 

    bring back the emotional state..„,the motivational state at will." 15 



    Analysis 

    ESP makes some bold and unique claims about what ft wants to accomplish and what it is. In 
    summary the following list presents many of the salient points of the ESP program. 

    1. It Is designed to "help individuals develop the emotional and Intellectual skills necessary to 
    reach their maximum potentiaf in all areas of llfe."^ 

    2. ESP is a "science based on the belief that the more consistent a person Is in their thinking, 
    the more successful the individual will be. niZ 



    3. "All adults have disintegrations because when we were children learning to be adults and 
    learning about the world our perspective was based on the perception, intellect, and wisdom 
    of a small child." iS 

    4. "There has never been a vehicle in our society that allowed us to go through and re-examine 
    these beliefs and re-incorporate them now from an adult perspective - until now. Rational 
    Inquiry Is that vehicle. It is the systematic Introspective science that provides us with the 
    necessary tools for human transformation" 16 

    5. "There are no ultimate victims." 20 



    6. "The Information gleaned'from ESP Seminars is to be kept confidential,"^ 1 

    7, "There Is a pledge to control as much of the money of the world as possible within each 
    student's success plan. In fact it is essential for the survival of the world for as much money 

    of th world to be controlled by ethical people. 1 — 



    8, w It is our belief that humanity cannot survive another fall, All members of the human team 
    must understand the historic reasons behind this tendency so we can change it and survive. 
    We believe this Is the ultimate cause because it means our existence and all other causes 
    and our existence depend on this knowledge. The Mission of ESP Is to develop an integrated 
    ethical framework of human experience to stop the destruction of value in the world and 
    move humanity forward, This practice session explains ESP's mission and gives students a 
    clear knowledge of how and why to act and to change historic trends." 23 

    The first point of analysis deals with a claim that ESP will provide the tools, or training that will help 



    Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS L DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 46 of 79 \ 
    S AUJI°.?nl|^^fli0 native Success Programs Inc. 



    people reach their maximum potential In all areas If life. What does this mean? What is maximum 
    potential? Are There scientific measures for maximum potential? Does "all areas of life" extend to 
    health benefits? Would those taking the training have less cancer, less heart disease? Do ESP 
    graduates have better marriages, happier children? The point is that the use of the phrase n all 
    areas of life" and "maximum potential" appear promising but the phrases demand defining, 
    otherwise they are phrases without practical, concrete application. 

    Further, how does Raniere know? What evidence has he provided? Having hotel conference rooms 
    filled with happy attendee Is not "proof that the program has achieved maximum potential In all 
    areas of life. It may be proof that there are people in the room. Some may be happy to be there, 
    some may want to leave, some may have benefitted in some areas of their lives, some may have 
    seen decline in aspects In other areas of their Jives. The point is that the area Is open to empirical 
    investigation, but there are no Independent studies demonstrating that ESP can support these 
    claims. 

    The second point is the claim that ESP Is a science. Raniere says It is, but that does not make it so. 
    Science must meet certain requirements. There is nothing in the published scientific literature 
    about ESP nor has an exhaustive search of the psychological literature base shown any publications 
    by Keith Raniere 

    The third area for analysis concerns the fact that adults have perceptual distortions, 
    "disintegrations* developed from childhood. He too was a child and was likewise a casualty of 
    perceptual distortions. This presents a problem for Raniere. How did he overcome these 
    distortions? By what measure would one judge that Raniere Is free of the distortions? How did 
    Raniere know there were distortions? How does Raniere know that every child suffers from these 
    distortions? Did he do a study of every child on earth? Such a study is clearly impossible. 
    Therefore, how does he know this truth? Unfortunately, the workshop participant appears to have 
    to accept these claims by faith. But this faith is a far cry from the scientific claims of ESP that 
    Raniere asserts, 

    The fourth area is an extension of the third, namely, that not only do all humans have distortions 
    or disintegrations but no one has ever developed a mechanism to examine these disintegrations 
    and correct them, Again, the attendee must rely on Raniere's word alone. Of course, one must 
    assume the truth of the disintegrations to then assume that Raniere has also scanned all the 
    "vehicles In our society" to see If any one group, individual or system has re-examined the faulty 
    beliefs or disintegrations held by the world's masses, Raniere apparently has provided no evidence 
    that he has done such an analysis. And if he has It would be a monumental undertaking. 

    Number five, maintains that There are no ultimate victims." What does this mean? How far do we 
    take human responsibility? Is a raped woman somewhat responsible for her rape? Is a battered 
    wife somewhat responsible for her battering? Is an employee subject to a mean, dishonest, boss 
    somehow not a victim? Are slaves in some manner not victims? Are those hit and hopelessly 
    crippled by a drunk driver not victims? Are those accidently paralyzed by the slip of a surgeon's 
    knife not victims? What does Raniere have to say to this? The normal definition of victim, according 
    to the Oxford Dictionary of the English Language, is "a person harmed, Injured, or killed as a result 
    of a crime or accident, 2. A person who is tricked or duped/' Common observation teaches that 
    there are victims. ESP appears to make vicKmhood seem as unnatural as sensing the brisk chill on 
    one's cheeks on the morning of the first autumn frost, 

    The sixth area of analysis concerns the need to keep the ESP material confidential, and by 
    extension invite people to attend to ESP Intensives where they pay to receive this information. 
    Certainly, Mr. Raniere has intellectual property rights If he so desires. Most of his material has a 
    patent pending and copyright on the bottom of the printed materials. He certainly has the right for 
    his students not to distribute the material, copy It, or sell it. But the ESP Mission Statement says, 



    "The methods and Information I learn in ESP are for my use only, I will not speak of them, or in 



    i 



    Case l:03-c^-00976-GLSiDRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 47 of 79 > 
    SEP, 3. 2003^1 1 ; 00A% &eE MLT% veSuccessProgra ^ InCi NO. 1 38 ^ pP._ 34 f9 



    any way give others knowledge of them, outside ESP, Part of the condition of being accepted Into 
    ESP is to keep all its information confidential. If I violate this I am breaking a promise and 
    breaching my contract, but more Importantly I am compromising my inner honesty and integrity. 11 

    This segment of the Mission segment appears to stretch beyond the Intent of what might be 
    covered by copyright and Intellectual property rights. The confidentiality issue seems to approach a 
    gag order. Why? What is the harm in some general discussion about your workshop. In fact, what 
    would be the harm if you have invested so much time In these Intenslves and share some general 
    observations about them with your wife, mother, or boss? The prohibition on sharing may serve as 
    a wedge between those who have taken the courses and those who have not. This confidentiality 
    issue may put pressure on people to enroll loved ones just so they can talk again. Perhaps the 
    actual answer Is not as important as the question "Why? Why is It necessary? 11 It would seem that 
    some of the pressure on the copyright issue would be taken off If Raniere published some tapes, 
    wrote a few articles, or wrote a book. Then people could blab all they wanted about his book, the 
    tapes, articles, etc, And it would answer the nagging question "Why?" But if Raniere Isn't interested 
    is selling tapes, then there may be a problem elsewhere. 

    Number seven is simply breathtaking, that ESP graduates need to make as much money as 
    possible and control as much money as possible in order to save the world from destruction. A 
    modest proposal, and a humble one as welll History has shown that the ethic of seeking wealth is a 
    risky one at best especially one that tells us to control as much as possible, as much of the wealth 
    In the world I Power corrupts! Wealth also tends to corrupt. How did Raniere, a la "Vanguard," 
    divine such truth? On face value any proposal that suggests that a group of graduates from a 
    human potential seminar should control as much money, wealth, and resources of the world as 
    possible in order to save the world seems to come leaping out of the pages of a James Bond novel! 
    Here Bond Is summoned by M and a file Is given to him about a madman - a Keith Raniere who has 
    trained over 400,000 followers who are now rapidly accumulating most of the world's wealth. ESP 
    followers have plans on "controlling as much of the wealth, money end resources of the world as 
    possible." I am sure someone of importance will look at Raniere* His claims are not benign. Either 
    they must be taken seriously, that is he has developed a science and therefore he must come up 
    with the corresponding proof. So far he has not. Or he Is the leader of one of the largest human 
    potential growth enterprises, devoid of scientific proof. If his claims are bogus then it is likely that 
    he is a person with a serious mental problem and/or a con man with very grand and perhaps not so 
    benevolent schemes. 

    Number eight continues with the seventh theme, "It is our belief that humanity cannot survive 
    another fall. All members of the human team must understand the historic reasons behind this 
    tendency so we can change it and survive, We believe this is the ultimate cause because It means 
    our existence and all other causes and our existence depend on this knowledge. The Mission of ESP 
    Is to develop an Integrated ethical framework of human experience to stop the destruction of value 
    In the world and move humanity forward. This practice session explains ESP's mission and gives 
    students a clear knowledge of how and why to act and to change historic trends." 25 

    The same arguments and analysis applied to number seven applies to number eight. However, not 
    only Is ESP interested In wealth and power, the knowledge that ESP possesses ts essential for the 
    survival of humanity! What Moses and all True prophets throughout the ages of human history 
    could not do, Raniere claims he can do. It now ft appears that Raniere has developed an ethical 
    framework "to stop the destruction of value in the world and move humanity forward.* This 
    appears nothing short of a religion, a system that has answers to the problems of life. 

    Some meta analysis is in order. The Mission and the other promotional material that I have cited 
    from ESP bear two similarities to other types of groups. First, Dr, Robert J, Ufton describes a 
    concept he calls "sacred science". ESP is portrays the characteristics of the "sacred science" In the 

    following ways, 26 



    First there is the "ultimate moral vision for the ordering of human existence." Then, there seems to 



    Case l:Q3-cv-00976-GLS^DRH Document 71 Filed'11/25/03 Page 48 of 79 * 
    SEP, 3, 2 3^ 1 1 j 1 Al^t^ E M L T W ltive Success Programs Tnc. NO, 138 » PP. 35of9 



    be little room for questioning of basic assumptions, Raniere cleverly redefines "cult" in an attempt 
    to deflect questions about his organization, Next there is a demand In sacred science for a 
    "reverence for the originators of the Word/ A comparison with the readings of ESP can clearly see 
    the emphasis paid on Tribute" and especially tribute to 'Vanguard/ Sacred science makes the 
    claim of airtight scientific precision, and ESP also makes the claim that it too is scientific. Here we 
    have with ESP the Idea that Ranlere's moral vision can be True for alt men for all times, a True 
    sacred science that, according to Raniere, fs a scientific discovery. 

    The similarities between ESP and a sacred science continue to the individual level. There fs the 
    promise of personal growth and success. Again, the possibility for genufne insight and inner 
    discovery Is held out to the seeker. And this experience of genuine inner transformation clouds the 
    reality that the overarching truth of the movement is not based on some logic and science that is 
    going to change the course of history- ESP has created a system so broad that within the system 
    there is no thought or area that cannot be adequately covered by some principle. And that is 
    exactly like a sacred science, "there Is no thought or action which cannot be related to it. ll2Z 

    The teaching and practices of the workshop contafn elements that correspond to the eight themes 
    of thought reform as described by Lifton, of which the "sacred science" is just one. The materials 
    from several Intenslves were examined/ Including those from 1/30/2001, 12/2000, 1/2001, 
    2/2001, 4/2001, 5/2001, 6/2001 and 7/20001, The specific examples are individually referenced. 

    So far we have presented evidence showing that ESP has characteristics that are consistent with 
    the themes of thought reform. What then are some of the consequences of those subject to 
    thought reform programs? Lifton observed certain clinical symptoms In the subjects he studied. For 
    example: borderline psychotic state, split identity, fear (p. 33), confusion (p. 34), feeling 
    neglected, hostile, suspicious, critical, lonely, missing communism - yet terrible ambivalence about 
    it (pp. 35,36), lifestyle changes (p, 39). Other symptoms include Inability to distinguish the real 
    from the unreal (p. 45), an attack on one's sense of inner Identity, a confession process of 
    expelling the old self and allowing the group to re-educate the person. (pp, 67,68). In such 
    environments people become guilty, they feel they must change, they must confess, betray self 
    and/or others. Then comes as sense of fear, a near total difference between the new environment 
    and the old once known. There is then a fear of annihilation. One's only relief besides psychosis, 
    suicide, or death is to merge with the movement and thus experience the "new birth/ He then also - 
    experiences leniency, and then the student becomes a willing participant in his or her own thought 
    reform(pp, 70-73). However, the new self which was spawned by conspiracy and guilt. continues to 
    permeate the victim of thought reform (pp. 78-8l).There are also great problems with trust (p. 
    85). 

    Those who express thought reform cliches may reflect an Inner brittleness about their True inner 
    conversion (p. 118), Often there is ambivalence about confession, about the horrors of the group. 
    They may shock others and say something to the effect that things in the group were, "perfectly 
    well," they may say little to parents and talk about it at length to old friends (p. 125). Guilt can be 
    overwhelming and irrational - guilt about still holding good thoughts about the group, and guilt 
    towards those who arranged their release (p. 126). 

    Even among apparent resisters there had been penetration Into the theological structures of, for 
    example, a priest (p. 126), Thought reform succeeded in eliciting incriminating confessions from all 
    Westerners whom Lifton Interviewed (p. 150). Resisters though suffered fear, confusion, and 
    agitation (p, 175), Some felt shame for the perceived moral failures in cooperating with 
    communists while under their mental sway CP. 186). Certain aspects of the movement are retained 
    while the movement as a whole is rejected (p. 195), In time even the flaws of the remaining 
      portion, I.e., criticism and self criticism, are rejected (p. 195). 

      The long term task for recovery was to regain the self overcome with guilt, In a word "the 
      restoration of integrity''^, 223). 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 49 of 79 > 

      3 ILiJJ^ NO. 138 PiP. 36ofS 



      As Ufton noted, for those Westerners imprisoned and subjected to thought reform programs only 
      one or possibly two from fewer than a hundred were transformed into genuine communists (p, 
      237) ♦ But knowing the enduring effects of thought reform is perhaps the most essential aspect in 
      understanding thought reform. 

      "Despite the years that had passed since their imprisonment, these men and women were still 
      grappling with the powerful emotions and ideas Implanted by the Chinese Communists. Most had 
      succeeded in neutralizing them; but the Implant had been compelling enough to defy easy excision. 
      For once a man has been put through prison thought reform, he never completely casts off its 
      picture of the world and of himself (p. 237). 

      "Four years after the experience my subjects still bore marks of both fear and relief" (p, 238) 

      Yet undergoing such an ordeal can be "therapeutic," there are reports of becoming "emotionally 
      strengthened," and becoming more sensitive to one's own and others 1 inner feelings, and "more 
      flexible and confident In human relationships"^, 238), 

      Of those in the revolutionary colleges, where there was no physical Imprisonment, symptoms were 
      also present. There were first-hand reports of some becoming psychotic, at least one third of the 
      students were observed to show signs of "fatigue, insomnia, loss of appetite, vague aches and 
      pains, upper respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms" (p. 266), Common symptoms included fear, 
      guift, hate, inability to maintain emotional control regarding feelings relating to communism, and 
      nightmares (pp. 289-299). 

      A profound sense of "anomie with profound persona! and social and social dislocation and 
      unrelatedness" is perhaps the hallmark of alt thought reform victims (p. 309). 

      Clearly, the thought reform experience is not benign- However, In saying this it would be erroneous 
      to conclude all participants are harmed equally. Before leaving Ufton, it Is Important to note his 
      observation made in the preface to the 1989 edition to his Thought Reform and the Psychology of 
      Totalism. There he commented how the advent of communism had been superseded by a 
      "worldwide epidemic of political and religious fundamentalism. ....these latter groups are often 
      referred to as cults." Lifton went on to define cults as groups with charismatic leadership, and 
      having patterns of thought reform as described in his book (p, vii). 

      In closing there is an entire body of literature about cults and psychological harm. For brevity's 
      sake, I will list only two major references on the topic 

      Footnotes: 

      1 See 12 point mission statement by Keith Ranlere 



      2 From promotional piece entitled "We teach everything nobody else teaches... and everything they do - Executive 
      success programs 



      3 Ibid. 



      4 Ibid 



      12 Point Mission Statement of Keith Raniere 



      - ^ I i A l-i 1 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 50 of 79 > 
      ^^^.AA , .^! 1j 02^^^ E^LTW^ve Success Programs Inc. NO. 138' Fi P. 37**"* 

      6 Ibid 

      7 "Mission" Student notes 3/2001 p.l. 

      8 Promotional Material entitled "Executive Success Programs, inc, (ESP)* dated 1/30/2001 

      * See ESP materials White, Yellow, Orange Sash" Draft Copyright 2000 Executive Success programs, Inc, 

      10 "Tfie Face of The Universe" Student's note #2 "Projection," 3/2001 

      11 "Parasite/Producer Module I -Concepts Student Notes, p.l 7/2001 

      12 Ibid, 

      13 "Good and Bad" Student Notes, p.l, 7/2001 

      14 "Motivation, Building Desire" Student Notes, p.l 3/2001 

      15 Ibid, 

      16 "Executive Success Programs, Inc promotional materia! dated 1/30/2001 

      17 Ibid. 

      18 Ibid. 

      19 Ibid. 



      20 12 Point Mission statement of Keith Ranlere 



      21 ibid. 



      22 Ibid. 



      23 "Mission" Student notes, p.l, 3/2001 

      24 Utilizing Psyclit, a computerized literature search of all psychological and psychiatric journals, nothing appeared 
      under Keith Raniere or Executive Success Programs, Inc* 

      25 "Mission" Student notes, p,l, 3/2001 

      26 Robert Jay Lifton, Thought Reform and The Psychology of Totaiisnv. A study of "Brainwashing" in china, Chapel Hill 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 51 of 79 \ 
      SEP, 3. 2003 D 1[:02A^thfiEMLTWctive Success Programs Inc. NO. 138' F| 'P, 38 OIb ' 



      and London, The University of North Carolina Press, 1989 edition. 
      27 Ibid. 



      26 Paul R, Martin, Michael D. Langone, Arthur A. Dole, Jeffrey Wiltrout, 1992. "Post-Cult Symptoms as Measured Before 
      and After Residential Treatment." Cultic Studies Journal, Vol, 9 No. 2, pp, 219-250. 



      Jodi Lynn Aronoff, Jay Steven, Peter Mallnoski, 2000. "Are Cultic Environments Psychologically Harmful?" Clinical 
      Psychology Review, Vol. 20, No.l, pp. 91-111. 

      Note: Paul Martin is the Director of Well^ prlna Retreat and a licensed clinical psychologist. Wellsprirtg is a nonprofit 
      residential treatment facility, which was founded in 1966. Located near Albany, Ohio the retreat offers care, education 
      and counseling to the victims of cults, religious abuse, coercive persuasion and/or thought reform programs. It Is a 
      nonprofit corporation staffed by credentialed mental health professionals. 

      Copyright © 2003 Paul Martin, Ph.D. 
      To see more documents/articles regarding this group/organization/subject 




      I Home 


      Database 


      CuitNewa 


      Search 


      Getting Kelp 


      Forum 


      Mind Control 


      Legal 


      1 Contact Us 


      About Us 


      WhafsNw 


      Videos 


      Links 


      Books 


      Support 


      FAQ 



      Case l:03^cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed* 11/25/03 Page 52 of 79 ' 



      Exhibit B 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 FilecJMl/25/03 Page 53 of 79 ' 
      What's $2,995 Million Between Former Enemies? Page 1 of 3 



      What's $2,995 Million Between 
      Former Enemies? 

      Phoenix New Times /December 19 -25, 1996 
      By Tony Ortega 

      In 1995, a jury awarded Jason Scott $5 million, ruling that his civil rights had been violated during 
      an involuntary "deprogramming" by Rick Ross, a Phoenix resident and well- known cult expert. That 
      judgment eventually forced Ross into bankruptcy court, put an anticult group out of business and 
      made national news. 

      Last week, however, the case made a sudden and surprising about -face. 

      Scott and Ross reached a settlement that requires the deprogrammer to pay Scott not $3 million— 
      his share of the judgment— but a mere $5,000. As part of the agreement, Ross will also give Scott 
      200 hours of professional services, free of charge. 

      Meanwhile, Scott has reunited with his mother, who hired Ross to do the deprogramming/and has 
      fired his attorney, Kendrick Moxon, a member of the Church of Scientology, which has a history of 
      opposing Ross. Scott' s new attorney is Graham Berry, who is well- known for his role in litigation 
      against the Church of Scientology. 

      The sudden settlement and lawyer- swap is just the latest twist in a hotly contested case full of 
      clashing allegations by anticult activists and representatives of Scientology. 

      The case springs from a 1990 incident in which three men grabbed 18- year-oid Scott, handcuffed 
      him, put duct tape over his mouth and stuffed him into a van. Looking on were Rick Ross and 
      Kathy Tonkin, Scott's mother. Tonkin had asked Ross to perform the involuntary deprogramming of 
      Scott after Ross had persuaded her two younger sons to leave a Bellevue, Washington, Pentecostal 
      church. Tonkin had asked her entire family to attend the church but later left. 

      Scott was taken by Ross' "security" men to a beach house and held 
      against his will for days as Ross tried to convince him that his 
      church was a destructive cult. Eventually, Scott escaped, and 
      criminal charges were brought against Ross and the three men. All 
      four were acquitted in 1994. 

      The settlement 
      requires Phoenix 
      cult expert Rick 
      Ross to pay Jason 
      Scott a mere 
      $5,000. 

      A year later, however, a civil-court jury in Seattle found that Ross, 
      his three accomplices and the Cult Awareness Network had violated 
      Scott's civil rights, and ordered them to pay Scott $5 million. The 

      Cult Awareness Network (CAN) was included as a defendant in that lawsuit because a former 
      member of the network, which acts as a clearinghouse for cult information, had referred Tonkin to 
      Ross. 



      [Note: WARNING! The Cult Awareness Network (CAN) was recently bankrupted and 
      bought up by Scientology. We strongly recommend you do not contact them for 
      assistance.] 



      CAN'S share of the civil penalty— more than $1 million— forced the Chicago- based organization into 
      bankruptcy. The Washington Post recently reported that CAN' s assets— everything but its 
      confidential files- had been sold by the bankruptcy estate for $20,000. The purchaser was Steven 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 54 of 79 5 
      What's $2,995 Million Between Former Enemies? Page 2 of 3 



      Hayes, a Scientologist attorney whose partner, Timothy Bowles, once shared offices with Kendrick 
      Moxon. 

      But that asset sale seems to have sparked the settlement between Ross and Scott— a settlement 
      that is unlikely to please the Church of Scientology. 

      Kathy Tonkin has repeatedly claimed that her son pursued his lawsuit against Rick Ross and CAN 
      only at the urging of his Scientologist attorney, Moxon. (Moxon insists Scott came to him for help.) 
      Scott and his mother reunited several weeks ago, and she persuaded him to contact Ross to work 
      out a settlement. As the settlement was being negotiated, the sale of CAN property became public. 

      "When he became aware that the CAN asset sale was occurring without seeing any benefit himself, 
      [Scott] began to wonder if Mr. Moxon' s interests were different than his own. And that thought was 
      confirmed when he read the Washington Post article/' says Graham Berry, Scott's new attorney. 

      "The Church of Scientology has had a long- standing campaign to destroy the Cult Awareness 
      Network . It was in the interests of Mr. Moxon' s major client, the Church of Scientology, to destroy 
      CAN totally and to do what has occurred. It was not in Jason Scott's interest at all. " 

      Scott has not just fired an attorney with ties to Scientology; he has hired an attorney with a history 
      of opposing that church. 

      w In my very first conversation with Jason," Berry says, "within the first minute of that conversation, 
      I advised Jason that he was talking to someone Kendrick Moxon would consider his archenemy. 
      Jason understood that and continued to talk to me for nearly an hour. I also disclosed to Jason that 
      I have a long history of litigation against the Church of Scientology which considers me to be one 
      of its major enemies, and that I have acquaintances in CAN and who represent CAN. As a result, I 
      not only insisted on a very comprehensive retainer agreement, but insisted that he receive 
      Independent legal advice before he retained me." 

      Berry suggested that his new client may take legal action over the handling of the bankruptcy case. 
      "I have put both the trustee in bankruptcy and Mr. Moxon on notice of a possible lawsuit by Jason 
      Scott for what has been done." 

      Moxon counters with claims that Jason Scott has been coerced into firing him. 

      "Jason Scott was kidnaped by these people. He was deprogrammed. I think he 's being held 
      prisoner," Moxon says, but he admits that he has no proof that Scott is being coerced or 
      imprisoned. 

      He also claimed not to know where Scott was being "held." However, Moxon knew enough, 
      apparently, to show up at the home of Kathy Tonkin in Lake Montezuma December 6 where Jason 
      Scott is presently staying. Accompanied by a Yavapai County sheriff' s deputy, Moxon served 
      subpoenas on Tonkin and Scott and engaged in a heated discussion with them. The sheriff' s office 
      confirms that, at Tonkin's request, Moxon was then escorted by the deputy from her property. 

      Berry says that Scott talked briefly to the Washington Post last week to make it clear he has not 
      been kidnaped or coerced. Scott is not making futher comment to media inquiries, Berry says. 

      "Mr. Moxon has refused to turn over any [of Scott' s legal] files and has filed a motion In the federal 
      district court in the state of Washington requesting a hearing on whether or not Jason Scott is 
      being held captive and is acting against his will," Berry says. (On December 5, the federal court 
      refused to consider Moxon's motion.) 



      'I, In the meantime, have filed a complaint with the California state bar, asking the state bar to 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 55 of 79 
      What's $2,995 Million Between Former Enemies? Page 3 of 3 



      intervene on the question of turning over the files to me. And I'm also urging the state bar to turn 
      the matter over to the U.S. attorney for further investigation." 

      Ross expresses relief that the case has been settled, but acknowledges that his own carelessness 
      with the settlement has produced problems. "I shared the agreement with a friend who apparently 
      leaked it, and it ended up in the hands of the Washington Post ," he says. 

      The premature announcement of the settlement, Berry says, made Scott so angry he may ask Ross 
      to renegotiate terms. Berry refused to say what services Ross would provide to Scott under the 
      agreement. But, the lawyer said, it would be a mistake to assume that Scott' s decision to make use 
      of Ross' time was a vindication of Ross or his deprogramming methods. 



      To see more documents/articles regarding this group/organization/subject click here. 



      Disclaimer 




      Home 


      Database 


      Cult News 


      Search 


      Getting Help 


      Forum 


      Mind Control 


      Legal 


      Contact Us 


      About Us 


      What's New 


      Videos 


      Links 


      Books 


      Support 


      FAQ 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 56 of 79 



      EXHIBIT 

      C 



      1 

      2 
      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      03-CV-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 57 of 79 

      COPY 

      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
      NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK 



      NXIVM CORPORATION, et al. 



      Plaintiffs, 

      -versus - 
      THE ROSS INSTITUTE, et al. 

      Defendants. 



      TRANSCRIPT OF PRO CEED INGS held in and for 
      the: United States District Court, Northern District of 
      New York, at the Janes T. Foley United States Courthouse, 
      445 Broadway, Albany, New York 12207, on MONDAY, 
      SEPTEMBER 8, 2003, before the HON. THOMAS J. McAVOY, 
      United States District Oourt Judge. 



      03-CV-976 
      (DECISION) 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      1 

      2 
      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      03-CV-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 58 of 79 
      APPEARANCES : 



      PCR THE PLAINTIFF: 



      TOBLN, DEMPF LAW FIRM 

      BY: KEVIN A. LUIBRAND, ESQ. 

      - and - 
      SCHMEISER, OLSEN LAW FIRM 
      BY: ARLEN L. OLSEN, ESQ. 



      FOR THE DEFENDANT ROSS INSTTIUiK: 



      GLEASQN, DUNN LAW FIRM 

      BY: THOMAS F. GLEASON, ESQ. 



      FOR THE DEFENDANT STEPHANIE FRANCO: 

      RIPER, DANZIG LAW FIRM 

      BY: ANTHONY J. SYLVESTER, ESQ. 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      3 
      4 
      5 
      £ 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      -cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 59 of 79 



      NXIVM v THE ROSS INSTITUTE 



      (Court ccnmenced at 10:30 AM.) 

      THE CLERK: NXIVM Corporation, et al. versus 
      the Ross Institute, 03-CV-976. 

      May I nave the appearances for the plaintiff. 

      MR. LUIBRAND: For the plaintiffs, Kevin 
      Luibrand from Tcbin & Denpf in Albany. 

      THE COURT: All right. 

      MR. OLSEN: For the plaintiffs, Arlen Olsen 
      from Schmeiser & Olsen. 

      THE CLERK: On behalf of the defendant. 

      MR. SYLVESTER: Yes, good morning, your Honor. 
      Anthony J. Sylvester from Riker, Danzig, on both matters, for 
      the defendant Stephanie Franco. 

      MR. GLEASCN: Thomas F. Gleason, in both 
      matters, on behalf of the Ross Institute, Rick Ross and Paul 
      Martin, and Wellspring Retreat, Inc. and I think that's it. 

      THE COURT: All right. The plaintiffs' motion 
      is brought by separate order to shew cause for preliminary 
      injunction preventing the defendants from disseminating 
      information about the plaintiffs' business. So Mr. Luibrand 
      Ahy should the Court issue injunctions in this case? 

      (Oral argument heard.) 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      2 
      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      D3-CV-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 60 of 79 
      NXTVM v THE ROSS INSTITUTE 



      4 



      (Brief recess at 11:25 AM.) 

      (Court reconvened at 11:32 7AM.) 

      THE COURT: I am just going to begin by 
      addressing something that wasn't addressed by the parties, 
      something about my gratuitous carment before you began 
      argument. 

      As is evident, cases 03-CV-976 and 03-CV-1051 
      involve carmen questions of fact. Separate trials would be 
      wasteful of the scarce judicial resources in this district. 
      See Internet law Library Inc. versus Carr, 2002 Vfestlaw 
      550966 *2. In the exercise of discretion, the Court 
      consolidates the two actions pursuant to Rule 42 (a) . See 
      Curtis versus CitiBank NA, 226 F.3d 133, at 138. The first 
      filed case, 03-CV-976, will be the lead case. 

      The Court has already set forth the 
      preliminary injunction standard in its August 21st decision 
      in the lead case. The Court adds, however, that while a 
      factual hearing is generally required on an application for 
      an injunction, no hearing is required where no material 
      issues are in dispute. Maryland Casualty Company versus 
      Realty Advisory Board on Labor Relations, 107 F.3d 979, at 
      984. 

      Addressing the o^pyright claim first, 
      plaintiffs are correct that a demonstration of likelihood of 
      success on the merits equates with a presumption of 

      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      03-CV-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 61 of 79 
      NXEVM v THE ROSS INSTITUTE 

      irreparable harm. See Randan House Inc. versus Rosetta Bocks 
      LLC, 283 F.3d 490, at 491. However, plaintiffs have not made 
      such a demonstration. 

      There is no dispute that plaintiffs offer 
      personal success programs, but none of the defendants offer 
      anything remotely similar. Further, there's no dispute that 
      the allegedly offending works of Dr. N&rtin criticize 
      plaintiffs' courses, but do not encourage readers to take any 
      other type of self - improvement course. 

      Section 107 of Title 17, United States Cede 
      provides that the, quote, fair use of a copyrighted work, 
      including such use by reproduction and copies for purposes 
      such as criticism, ccmnent, news reporting, teaching, 
      scholarship or research is not an infringement of copyright, 
      close quote. The statute sets forth four factors to be 
      examined, quote, in determining whether the use made of a 
      work in any particular case is a fair use, close quote. The 
      statute further provides that, quote, the fact that a work is 
      unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair use if 
      such finding is made upon consideration of all the above 
      factors, close quote. 

      While the defendants have the burden of 
      proving that their potentially infringing use was fair, see 
      Infinity Broadcast Corporation versus Kirkwood, 150 F.3d 104, 
      at 107, they need not establish that all of the factors favor 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      1 

      2 
      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      33-CV-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 62 of 79 
      NXR/M v THE ROSS INSTITUTE 



      6 



      than. Wright versus Warner Books Incorporated, 953 F.2d 731, 
      at 740. 

      Here, given the fact that Martin's works 
      clearly constitute, quote, criticism, scholarship or 
      research, close quote, about plaintiffs' courses and not a 
      primer cn executive success techniques, the first factor is 
      in the defendants' favor. See New Era Publications 
      International ApS versus Carol Publishing Group, 904 F.2d 
      152. His two works are clearly transformative in nature. 
      Campbell versus Acuff-Rose Music, Incorporated, 510 U.S. 569, 
      at 579. The fact that seme defendants might conceivably 
      profit from Dr. Martin's criticism t±irough the offering of 
      the dj^rogrammng services doesn't change the impact of this 
      factor. See Castle Rock Entertainment versus Carol 
      Publishing Group, 150 F.3d 132, 141, 142. 

      When analyzing the second factor, courts look 
      to whether the original work previously had been published, 
      whether it is fictional, and whether it is creative in 
      nature. As indicated, the fact that the original work was 
      not published requires the Court to examine all the factors. 
      Creative works are entitled to greater copyright protection 
      than factual works. Video-Cinema Films Incorporated versus 
      Cable News Network Inc., 2001 Westlaw 1518264 at *7. This 
      factor favors the plaintiffs, but is not dispositive. Cn 
      Davis versus The Gap Incorporated, 246 F.3d 152, at 175. 

      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      D3-CV-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 63 of 79 
      NXIVM v THE ROSS INSITIUIE 



      7 



      The third factor has both a quantitative and a 
      qualitative aspect to it. Wright, at 738. Thus, this Oaurt 
      must consider whether the quotes in Nkrtin's work formed a 
      significant percentage of the copyrighted works and whether 
      the quotes are essentially the heart of the copyrighted 
      works. Wright, at 738. Courts have also considered, quote, 
      whether the quantity of the material used was reasonable in 
      relation to the purpose of the copying, close quote. 
      American Gecphysical Union versus Texaco Incorporated, 60 
      F.3d 913, at 926, and citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586. 

      While Martin's works do quote expansively from 
      plaintiffs' materials, the quotes appear reasonably necessary 
      to convey his point. Further, plaintiffs have asserted that 
      it took 30 years to develop the rational inquiry technology 
      and that the science of this technology is realized by the 
      teticulous fashion that words, the order of words, questions 
      and order of questions are used in the course material. The 
      defendant Franco has submitted an affidavit which attaches 
      Dver 500 pages of course materials, much of which is in 
      xitline form to be covered in consecutive ten-hour day 
      seminars in which students interact with ESP coaches. How 
      ihe coaches respond to student's statements and answers does 
      lot appear in the course materials. Because a copyright 
      protects only the form of expression and not the ideas 
      expressed, Attia versus Society of New York Hospital, 201 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 64 of 79 

      NXIVM v THE ROSS INSTITUTE 8 



      If. 3d 50, at page 54, cert, denied, 531 U.S. 843; see 17 U.S. 
      Code Annotated, Section 102 (b) , it hardly appears that 
      I expression of plaintiffs' theory could be captured in the 
      I registered works or that Martin's two writings Which, taken 
      'together, consists of 17 pages, could capture the heart of 
      it. This factor is, at best, neutral. 

      looking at the fourth factor, the Supreme 
      [Court in Campbell explained that if the secondary work harms 
      the market for the original t±irough criticism or parody, 
      I rather than by offering a market substitute for the original , 
      it does not produce a harm cognizable under the Copyright 
      I Act. That's in quotes, it does not produce a harm cognizable 
      under the Copyright Act, close quote. Campbell, at 592. 
      I Quote, the role of the courts is to distinguish between 
      I biting criticism that merely suppresses demand and copyright 
      infringement which usurps the market for the original, close 
      | quote. Campbell, at 592. 

      Martin's writings are undoubtedly 
      transformative secondary uses intended as a form of 
      criticism. All of the alleged harm arises from the biting 
      criticism of this fair use, not from a usurpation of the 
      [market by any of the defendants. See On Davis, at 175. 

      In On Davis, the Second Circuit wrote: 
      When secondary uses harms the market for or 
      lvalue of the original, courts must examine the source of the 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      03-CV-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 65 of 79 
      NXTVM v THE ROSS INSTITUTE 

      harm. If the harm resulted from a transformative secondary 
      use that lowered the public's estimation of the original, 
      paren, such as a devastating review of a book that quotes 
      liberally from the original to shew hew silly and poorly 
      written it is, close paren, this transformative use will be 
      found to be a fair use, notwithstanding the harm. 

      On Davis, at 175. 

      Consequently, not only is the fourth factor in 
      defendants' favor, it raises a question whether there is even 
      an actionable copyright claim here. 

      Plaintiffs have failed to demonstrate a 
      likelihood of success on the merits of the copyright claim 
      and consequently failed to demonstrate irreparable harm 
      caused by the violation. They've also failed to establish 
      that there are sufficiently serious questions going to the 
      merits to make them a fair ground for litigation. Therefore, 
      the preliminary injunction based an the alleged copyright 
      violations is denied. 

      Moving an, in order to establish a viable 
      claim under section 43 (a) of the Lariham Act, plaintiffs must 
      show that the defendants (1) made False or misleading 
      representations/ (2) for goods; (3) , in interstate cenmerce; 
      (4) in comiercial advertising or promotion; (5) about a 
      Taterial facet of plaintiffs' product, (6) that caused damage 
      to plaintiffs. Oanrned Corporation versus Erbe Electromedizin 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      03-CV-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 66 of 79 
      NXTVM v THE ROSS INSTITUTE 10 

      GmbH, 129 F.2d — 129 F.Supp.2d 461, at 470. Althou^i 
      plaintiffs point to seme inaccuracies in Hodmen 1 s report, 
      they hardly rise to the level of False or misleading 
      representations about a material facet of plaintiffs' 
      product. 

      Further, assuming that material 
      misrepresentations were made, there's no demonstration that 
      they occurred in commercial advertising or promotion. 
      Gcmriercial advertising or promotion under the Lanham Act is 
      defined as: (1) ccmnnercial speech; (2) made by a defendant 
      who was in ccmnnercial competition with the plaintiff; (3) for 
      the purpose of influencing consumers to buy the defendant 1 s 
      good or services; and (4) cUsseminated sufficiently to the 
      relevant purchasing public to constitute advertising or 
      promotion within that industry. Gordon & Breach Science 
      Publishers SA versus American Institute of Physics, 859 
      F.Supp. 1521, at 1535 and 1536. 

      While the Second Circuit has not expressly 
      adopted the second element, it has adopted the first, third 
      and fourth elements of this standard. See Fashion Boutique 
      of Short Hills, Incorporated versus Fendi USA Incorporated, 
      314 F.3d 48, at page 58. Other circuit courts have adopted 
      all four elements, including the competition requirement. 
      Bee Proctor & Gamble Company versus Haugen, 222 F.3d 1262, at 
      L273 and 1274; that's the Tenth Circuit; Coastal Abstracts 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 67 of 79 

      IInXIVM v THE ROSS INSTITUTE 11 



      Service Incorporated versus First American Title Insurance 
      (Company, 173 F.3d 725, at 735; that's the Nine Circuit; 
      ! Seven-Up Company versus Coca Cola Company, 86 F.3d 1379, at 
      1384. The Supreme Court has stated that, quote, the Lanham 
      I Act was intended to make actionable the deceptive and 
      misleading use of marks and to protect persons engaged in 
      commerce against unfair competition, close quote. Two Pecos 
      Incorporated versus Taco Cabana, 505 U.S. 763, at 767, 768. 

      Plaintiffs were not in competition with any of 
      | the defendants . Further, there 1 s no possibility of consumer 
      confusion as to the origin or sponsorship of defendants' 
      I goods or services. Virgin Enterprises Limited versus Nawab, 
      335 F.3d 141, at 146. Dr. Hochman's article criticized the 
      I plaintiffs' courses, so any consumer seeking services from 
      iHochrren or Ross would not be confused that ESP scmehcw 
      sponsored them. Stephanie Franco's article mentioned rothing 
      I of ESP. There is no demonstration of a likelihood of success 
      'against the defendants on the Lanham Act claims. 

      Further, the defendants have raised a First 
      | Amendment defense to their speech. Offending commercial 
      speech Which violates the Lanham Act does not enjoy First 
      I Amendment protection, however, if the speech does not violate 
      the Lanham Act, it may be protected by the First Amendment. 
      [See Taubman Company versus Webfeats, 319 F.3d 770, at 774, 
      775. From the allegations and arguments, it's clear that the 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      03-CV-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 68 of 79 
      NXIVM v THE ROSS INSTITUTE 



      12 



      essence of plaintiffs' complaint is that they're being harmed 
      by the conclusion that they're a cult. This opinion is not a 
      enjoinable absent extraordinary circumstances, which is not 
      present here. See Metropolitan Opera Association versus 
      Local 100, Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees 
      International Union, 239 F.3d 172, at 176. An injunction 
      which may irrpose a prior restraint on speech is strongly 
      disfavored. See Metropolitan Opera Association, at 176. 
      Therefore, even assuming plaintiffs could establish 
      inseparable harm and sufficiently serious questions going to 
      the merits on this claim, the balance of hardships weigh in 
      favor of the defendant. The preliminary injunction is denied 
      on the Lanham Act. 

      Finally, plaintiffs seek an injunction based 
      upon the alleged breach of the confidentiality clause 
      contained in Stephanie's Franco's course application. 
      Assuming without deciding that the boiler plate wording is a 
      binding confidentiality agreement, the asserted First 
      Amendment defense would prevent the Court from issuing an 
      injunction of the scope requested by the plaintiffs. The 
      plaintiffs have not demonstrated that they've suffered or 
      will suffer irreparable harm caused by the asserted breach. 
      Accepting plaintiffs' vague allegations of harm as True, they 
      indicate that their business is suffering because they've 
      oeen labeled as a cult, not because clients or sponsors are 

      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      )3-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 69 of 79 
      NXrVM v THE ROSS INSTITUTE 



      13 



      flocking to seme other success program or because clients 
      feel they no longer need the ESP program and instead can get 
      the same information from Ross ' website . 

      While the clause in the application might 
      prevent Miss Franco from giving someone else the course 
      materials, it is doubtful that the clause could legally 
      prevent Miss Franco from expressing an opinion. Therefore, 
      even assuming that there existed seme sort of conspiracy 
      between Franco and the other defendants, which appears 
      doubtful an this record, there's no demonstration that the 
      breach of the confidentiality clause is causing the asserted 
      harm. Rather, that harm, if it is occurring, appears to be 
      caused by the various defendants' expression of opinion. The 
      Court will not enjoin that opinion. 

      On the other hand, the clause does seemingly 
      protect against course participants disclosing trade secrets 
      which, once disclosed to a competitor, could constitute 
      irreparable harm. See Worldwide Sport Nutritional 
      Supplements, Inc. versus Five Star Brands LLC, 80 F.Supp.2d 
      25, at page 33/ see Softel Inc. versus Dragon Medical and 
      Scientific CtmTTunicatians Inc., 118 F.3d 955, at 968, cert, 
      denied, 523 U.S. While there's no indication that a 
      disclosure to a competitor has occurred, Miss Franco did 
      seemingly agree not to transmit the course materials to 
      anyone. In order to maintain the status quo pending this 

      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      03-CV-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 70 of 79 
      NXIVM v THE ROSS INSTITUTE 



      14 



      litigation, she's enjoined from transmitting the materials to 
      anyone other than her attorneys and persons retained by them 
      in connection with these suits. And in addition, the 
      affidavit filed with the Court coitaining the bulk of the 
      course materials is hereby ordered sealed. 

      The other defendants who are not parties to 
      the alleged contract are not enjoined in this manner, but 
      they should be an notice that if they divulge plaintiffs' 
      materials in a fashion that would constitute the elements of 
      a caiman law misappropriation of trade secrets claim, the 
      Court will entertain another application for preliminary 
      injunction. 

      In conclusion, the Court finds no basis to 
      issue a preliminary injunction other than the limited 
      injunction preventing Miss Franco from disclosing the course 
      materials to anyone other than her attorneys. In all other 
      respects, plaintiffs' motions are denied. 

      The Court will issue its own order. 

      Thank you for interesting arguments an both 

      sides. 

      MR. SYLVESTER: Thank you, your Honor. 

      MR. LDTBRAND: Will the sealing order be a 
      separate order or will it be part -- 

      THE OCURT: It will be a part of the order 
      that I'm going to issue. 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      1 

      2 
      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      03-CV-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 71 of 79 

      NXIVM v THE ROSS INSTTIUTE 15 

      MR. LUIBRAND: All right. 
      THE COURT: Does it have to be separate? 
      MR. LMBRAND: Well, I don't know. I just — 
      I'm asking the question. 

      THE COURT: No. 

      MR. LUIBRAND: It's considered sealed 
      effective immediately? 

      THE COURT: Effective immediately. 

      MR. OLSEN: Your Honor, with respect to the 
      sealing order, just so I can clarify that, you are indicating 
      that whatever is on the website is affected by that? 

      THE COURT: Did you hear me say anything about 

      that? 

      MR. OLSEN: I did not. Just clarifying that, 

      your Honor. 

      THE COURT: Well, you don't have to clarify it 
      because you didn't hear it. 

      MR. OLSEN: All right. Thank you, your Honor. 
      (Court adjourned at 11:50 AM.) 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      1 

      2 
      3 
      4 
      5 
      6 
      7 
      8 
      9 
      10 
      11 
      12 
      13 
      14 
      15 
      16 
      17 
      18 
      19 
      20 
      21 
      22 
      23 
      24 
      25 



      03-CV-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 72 of 79 
      NXIVM v THE ROSS INSTITUTE 

      CERTIFICATION 



      I, BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR, Official Court 



      Reporter in and for the United States District Court, 
      Northern District of New York, do hereby certify that I 
      attended at the time and place set forth in the heading 
      hereof; that I did make a stenographic record of the 
      proceedings held in this matter and caused the same to be 
      transcribed; that the foregoing is a True and correct 
      transcript of the same and whole thereof. 




      Official Court Reporter 



      DATED: SEPTEMBER 11, 2003 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT REPORTER - NDNY 
      BONNIE J. BUCKLEY, RPR 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 73 of 79 



      EXHIBIT 
      D 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 74 of 79 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT U S " ^/STRICT COURT 

      NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK N-D. OF N.V. 

      NXIVM CORPORATION , f/k/a tuuJ 
      Executive Success Programs , Inc . ; i-AWRENCE K. BAERMAN CLFRk- 

      and FIRST PRINCIPLES, INC. ALBANY ' 

      Plaintiffs, 



      -against- j* 03-CV-976 



      THE ROSS INSTITUTE; RICK ROSS 
      a/k/a "Ricky Ross"; JOHN HOCHMAN; 
      and STEPHANIE FRANCO, 

      Defendants 




      NXIVM CORPORATION, f/k/a 
      Executive Success Programs, Inc.; 
      and FIRST PRINCIPLES, INC. 

      Plaintiffs , 

      -against- 03-CV-1051 

      (Member case) 

      THE ROSS INSTITUTE; RICK ROSS 
      a/k/a "Ricky Ross"; PAUL R. 
      MARTIN , PH . D . ; WELLS PRIN6 
      RETREAT , INC . ; and 
      STEPHANIE FRANCO, 

      Defendants 



      ORDER 

      McAvoy , D . J . : 

      For the reasons set forth from the f bench on September 8, 200 

      f 

      plaintiffs' motions for preliminary injunctions in the above- 
      captioned cases are granted in part and denied in part. It is 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 75 of 79 

      O ) 



      hereby 



      ORDERED that cases 03-CV-97 6 and 03-CV-1051 are consolidated 

      pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 42(a), with 03-CV-976 
      serving as the lead case; and it is further 

      ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that pending the final 
      disposition of the actions against her, or until further order of 
      this Court, defendant Stephanie Franco is enjoined from 
      transmitting Plaintiffs' course materials to anyone other than her 
      attorneys and persons retained by them in connection with these 
      suits; and it is further 

      ORDERED that the Clerk of the Court, or his designee, is 
      directed to detach the following two exhibits from the affidavits 
      to which they are attached and to file the exhibits separately 
      under seal: Exhibit A to Stephanie Franco's August 21, 2003 
      Supplemental Affidavit filed in 03-CV-976 (dkt. # 29); and Exhibit 
      C to Stephanie Franco's September 2, 2003 Affidavit filed in 03-CV- 
      1051 (dkt # 14) . The sealing order does not pertain to the 
      affidavits themselves, or the other exhibits attached thereto; and 
      it is further 

      ORDERED, that plaintiffs' motions are, in all other respects, 
      denied . 

      IT IS SO ORDERED ^ ) 





      U.S. District Judge 



      2 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 76 of 79 

      o o 



      U $- DISTRICT COURT 
      N.D. OF NX 7 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
      NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK 

      , F,Le ° ^ 

      SEP 9 ?nm M 

      NXIVM CORPORATION, f/k/a ° C{JUJ 

      Executive Success Programs, Inc.; ^vVRENCE K. BAEHMAN CLFRk- 

      and FIRST PRINCIPLES, INC. ALBANY ' 

      Plaintiffs , 

      -against- j; 03-CV-976 

      (Lead Case) 



      THE ROSS INSTITUTE; RICK ROSS 
      a/k/a "Ricky Ross"; JOHN HOCHMAN; 
      and STEPHANIE FRANCO, 



      Defendants 



      l> 



      NXIVM CORPORATION, f/k/a 
      Executive Success Programs , Inc . ; 
      and FIRST PRINCIPLES, INC. 

      Plaintiffs , 

      -against- 03-CV-1051 

      (Member case) 

      THE ROSS INSTITUTE; RICK ROSS 
      a/k/a "Ricky Ross"; PAUL R. 
      MARTIN , PH . D . ; WELLSPRING 
      RETREAT, INC.; and 
      STEPHANIE FRANCO, 

      Defendants 



      ORDER 

      McAvoy, D.J. : 

      For the reasons set forth from the (bench on September 8, 200 

      I 

      plaintiffs'' motions for preliminary injunctions in the above- 

      t ■ 

      captioned cases are granted in part andf denied in part. It is 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 77 of 79 

      O O 



      hereby 



      ORDERED that cases 03-CV-97 6 and 03-CV-1051 are consolidated 

      pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 42(a), with 03-CV-976 
      serving as the lead case; and it is further 

      ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that pending the final 
      disposition of the actions against her, or until further order of 
      this Court, defendant Stephanie Franco is enjoined from 
      transmitting Plaintiffs' course materials to anyone other than her 
      attorneys and persons retained by them in connection with these 
      suits; and it is further 

      ORDERED that the Clerk of the Court, or his designee, is 
      directed to detach the following two exhibits from the affidavits 
      to which they are attached and to file the exhibits separately 
      under seal: Exhibit A to Stephanie Franco's August 21, 2003 
      Supplemental Affidavit filed in 03-CV-976 (dkt. # 29); and Exhibit 
      C to Stephanie Franco's September 2, 2003 Affidavit filed in 03-CV- 
      1051 (dkt # 14). The sealing order does not pertain to the 
      affidavits themselves, or the other exhibits attached thereto; and 
      it is further 

      ORDERED, that plaintiffs' motions are, in all other respects, 
      denied . 

      IT IS SO ORDERED ^ \ 





      U.S. District Judge 



      2 



      Case l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03, Page 78 of 79 



      UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
      NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK 



      NXIVM CORPORATION, Formerly Known as EXECUTIVE 
      SUCCESS PROGRAMS, INC. and FIRST PRINCIPLES, INC., 

      Plaintiffs, 

      -- against - AFFIDAVIT OF SERVICE 

      THE ROSS INSTITUTE, RICK ROSS a/k/a Civil Action No. 03-CV-0976 

      "RICKY ROSS", JOHN HOCKMAN and (LEAD CASE) 

      STEPHANIE FRANCO, (TJM / DRH) 

      Defendants. 



      NXIVM CORPORATION, f/k/a EXECUTIVE SUCCESS 
      PROGRAMS, INC. and FIRST PRINCIPLES, INC., 

      Plaintiffs, Civil Action No. 03-CV-1051 

      (TJM / DRH) 

      — against — 

      THE ROSS INSTITUTE, RICK ROSS a/k/a 
      "RICKY ROSS", and PAUL R. MARTIN, PH.D., 
      WELLSPRING RETREAT, INC. and STEPHANIE 
      FRANCO, 

      Defendants. 



      STATE OF NEW YORK ) 
      COUNTY OF ALBANY ) ss: 

      ROSALYN SCHWARTZBERG, being duly sworn, deposes and says he is over 
      the age of 18 years old and that he is not a party to the within action; that on the 9 th day of 
      October, 2003, he served the Defendant The Ross Institute, Rick Ross, Paul R. Martin, 
      PH.D. and Wellspring Retreat, Inc.'s Notice of Motion for Summary Judgment with 
      Affidavit of in Support; Memorandum of Law and Statement of Material Fact Not 
      in Dispute Pursuant to Local Rule 7.1(a)(3) upon the following persons in the following 
      manner: 



      Lse l:03-cv-00976-GLS-DRH Document 71 Filed 11/25/03 Page 79 of 79 



      Arlen L. Olsen, Esq. 
      Schmeiser, Olsen & Watts, LLP 
      3 Lear Jet Lane, Suite 201 
      Latham, New York 12110 

      Peter R. Osinoff, Esq. 
      Bonne, Bridges, Mueller, O'Keefe & 

      Nichols 
      Wilshire Serrano Building 
      3699 Wilshire Boulevard, 10 th Floor 
      Los Angeles, California 90010-2719 



      Kevin A. Luibrand, Esq. 
      Tobin and Dempf, LLP 
      33 Elk Street 

      Albany, New York 12207 

      Anthony Sylvester, Esq. 
      Riker, Danzig, Scherer, Hyland 

      and Perretti, LLP 
      Headquarters Plaza 
      One Speedwell Avenue 
      Morristown, New Jersey 07962-1981 

      Linda B. Johnson, Esq. 
      Hinman, Howard & Kattell, LLP 
      700 Security Mutual Building 
      80 Exchange Street 
      P.O. Box 5250 

      Binghamton, New York 13902-5250 

      via regular first-class mail by depositing a True and correct copy of the same properly 
      enclosed in a post-paid wrapper in the Official Depository maintained and exclusively 
      controlled by the United States Post Office at 563 New Scotland Avenue, Albany, New 
      York, directed to said persons at said address, that being the last kpown address in the state 
      designated for that purpose upon the last papers served in this actibn or the places where the 



      above then resided or kept 
      conveniently obtained. 



      to before, 
      of Oct 



      offices, according 






      best information 




      w^ieii can 



      be 



      HWARTZBERG 

      / 



      )tary Public 

      ANNE ASCENZI 
      Notary Public, State of New York 
      Qualified in Albany County 
      Reg. No. 4777770 , 
      Commission Expires (# f£t[fcflp 
