ABSTRACT  
The present invention relates generally to a method for personal and group improvement. Rational inquiry (10) includes a plurality of questions, methods and observations leading to answers, meanings, ethics, personal essence, purpose and a greater awareness. The questions and observations in the method are provided to the individual in a matrix or a plurality of modules, including practices and inquiries. The matrix or modules, including practices and inquiries are used to assists the individual in determining a minimally assumptive matrix of consistent human internal existence and determining a minimally assumptive matrix of consistent reality. If through comparison of the minimally assumptive matrices, a difference is detected, a disintegration is said to occur. The disintegration is removed by allowing the individual to integrate through a more complete awareness of a limiting belief.

RATIONAL INQUIRY METHOD

FIELD OF THE INVENTION

The present invention relates generally to educational methods for personal improvement. In particular, the present invention relates to a method for detecting and removing disintegrations .

BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION

Educational methods for personal improvement are known in the art. For example, one educational method for personal improvement includes modifying the emotional response of a student to an upsetting stimulus. In other personal improvement methods, principles and habits of successful people are studied and revealed so that a student may try to copy or emulate these habits. Attitudes and traits of great leaders may be shown so that a student may try to emulate these characteristics.

SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

In order to overcome the above deficiencies, the present invention provides a method of rational inquiry. Rational inquiry includes a plurality of questions and observations leading to answers and a greater awareness. The questions and observations in the method are provided to the individual in a matrix or a plurality of modules, including practices and inquiries. The matrix or modules, including practices and inquiries are the framework to assist the individual in providing, determining and utilizing a matrix of consistent human internal existence and providing, determining and utilizing a matrix of consistent reality. If through comparison of the matrices, a difference is detected, a disintegration is said to occur.

Determining the matrix of consistent human internal existence and determining the matrix of consistent reality includes: examining freewill and deterministic view of human existence; reconciling into a consistent framework the freewill and deterministic views of human existence; deriving a limitation of human sensation, a limitation of human cognition, a limitation of human perception, and a limitation of human belief; and quantifying limitations of human belief to discover the extent of human potential .

Integration occurs when the two minimally assumptive matrices that are inconsistent in one or more points become consistent at one or more points. Rational inquiry teaches that the more integrated an individual is the more consistent his or her beliefs and behavior patterns will be. The more consistent with respect to reality the person is the better he or she will be in their life experience.

Rational inquiry changes the way individuals experience the world. When integration occurs, a piece of information falls into place and the meaning of the stimulus changes. Rational inquiry creates integrations so people become more consistent in their beliefs and behavior. Integration provides a profound shift in how people do things. Whatever made things seem difficult or impossible for them in the past or made them ineffective or unmotivated, literally just falls away and disappears .

A disintegration may be manifest in a bodily function response, an emotional function response, and/or an intellectual function response. Sometimes these responses are sub-optimal . For example, if an individual has a consistent sub-optimal emotional response to a stimulus, it is often a result of the meaning the student applies to the stimulus .

Traditional therapy modifies and changes the emotional response that the student has to a stimulus. The rational inquiry method modifies the meaning of the stimulus itself to the student before an emotional response occurs. The present invention includes a matrix or plurality of modules, including practices and inquiries that change a individual's recognition and beliefs through rational inquiry.

The plurality of modules, including practices and inquiries are the matrix used to arrive at a minimal basis. The modules, including practices and inquiries, create a consistent personal definitional basis for practical philosophical concepts and words, and also provides distinctions. Thus, through the modules, including practices and inquiries an individual may determine a minimally assumptive matrix of consistent human internal existence and determine a minimally assumptive matrix of consistent reality. These modules, including practices and inquiries include but not limited to, for example: teaching a student rules and rituals; teaching the student scripting for effective sales; teaching the student communication and being at cause for taking responsibility for choice at all times; teaching the student honesty and disclosure for building integrity; teaching the student how to generate rapport and an excited state to increase the effectiveness of communication; teaching the student persistence to build long-term commitment; teaching the student how to generate a peak intensity and power state to allow the student to be more effective in activities familiarity with his/her full bandwidth of emotions; teaching the student about work and value for providing the student a way to produce more satisfying results; teaching the student how to raise self-esteem to allow the student to be aware of many choices in a given context; teaching the student how to recognize good and bad so that the student can choose the good; teaching the student how to understand, identify and protect themselves against parasite strategies that keep people dependent on others and lower self-esteem; teaching the student about ethics, justice, crime and punishment and how ethics are upheld in a just system; teaching the student how to recognize and avoid shifters who destroy value; teaching the student how to pay tribute to others who have contributed to them; teaching the student about the basis of money; teaching the student that to raise ethics is to better society; teaching the student to evaluate their own skills to determine their market value; teaching the student time management skills; and teaching the student to stay in the present moment to gain effectiveness. The educational method further includes teaching the method using audio visuals including video tapes, internet, intranet, seminars and hard copy material .

BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS

The features of the present invention will best be understood from a detailed description of the invention and an embodiment thereof selected for the purposes of illustration and shown in the accompanying drawings in which:

FIG. 1 illustrates a flow chart of the rational inquiry method in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention;

FIG. 2 illustrates a diagram of the rational inquiry method including a computer system, an audio visual system, a seminar, and a hard copy presentation format; FIG. 3 illustrates a listing of basic modules, including practices and inquiries; and

FIG. 4 illustrates a flow chart for goal setting.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION

Although certain embodiments of the present invention will be shown and described in detail, it should be understood that various changes and modifications may be made without departing from the scope of the appended claims. The scope of the present invention will in no way be limited to the number of constituting components, the materials thereof, the shapes thereof, the relative arrangement thereof, etc. Basic features of the present invention are illustrated in detail in the accompanying drawings, wherein like reference numerals refer to like elements throughout the drawings. Although the drawings are intended to illustrate the present invention, the drawings are not necessarily drawn to scale. A portion of the disclosure of this patent document contains material which is subject to copyright protection. The copyright owner has no objection to facsimile (or) reproduction by anyone of the patent disclosure as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office public patent files or records, but otherwise reserves all copyright rights.

FIG. 1 illustrates a flow chart of the rational inquiry method in accordance with an embodiment of the present invention. The rational inquiry (e.g., a belief system) 12 is a method 10 that includes philosophy 14, communication 16, and learning 18. This system 12 defines a method for discovery of consistent human internal existence and a consistent reality and provides examples of these two matrices.

With respect to philosophy 14, all of a point set topology definitions can be rebuilt (compactness, connectedness, etc.) relating to philosophical concepts. Those definitions and actually the whole technology of point set topology and set theory can be translated over to philosophy. Different philosophies are connected and/or convex and things along those lines .

The philosophy 14 includes Boolean logic philosophic operators 20. The Boolean logic philosophic operators 20 use principles of set theory, mathematics and topology to analyze logical philosophical arguments and actually the creation of a philosophical form of questioning. This falls under philosophy and allows a person to take a philosophy, and by using point set mathematics literally, judge if the philosophy forms a consistent matrix, is consistent, and all of the point set topological properties exist. In particular Boolean logic is used to show that two philosophic concepts are either equivalent or subsets of each other.

Communication 16 includes technology interfaces 22 and prospective therapy 24. The technology interfaces 22 includes voice and visual 26. The technology interfaces 22 deal very specifically with the nature of human communication through reflexes and different voice stressors and patterns. A reflex is a response to a stimulus that is based on meaning. An individual can better create human and technology interfaces using these elements. With the use of reflexes and phonemic representation of voice through expression one can make technologic interfaces that can in fact sense human emotions and other different things in humans. Having a phonemic software package allows one to send e-mail or other correspondence that can be read in any given person's voice.

The prospective therapy 24 includes pre-emptive techniques 28, essence intent 30, deprogramming strategies 32, loading 34, parts balance 36, non-integration 38, and therapy by number (exploration of meaning) 40. The pre-emptive techniques 28 include techniques used (metaphorically) to close the front door before the horse gets out. They are a way to create double binds with a major force and a minor force, which also ties into the essence intent 30 and the use of remote set-ups. A preemptive technique 28 is a way of discussing something and building a logical foundation so that it can be used in the future, sort of like a lemma in mathematical proofs. Recapitulation, is defined as when a communication is done so that the punch line is not given until the very end, so that when that index (i.e., the punch line) is given, everything that came before it must be replayed and reevaluated in the mind in light of the new information. This allows for greater learning. It also allows for an "a-ha" experience (the hallmark of learning) . Pre-emptive techniques 28 allow a person to set up a story so that it has a more profound "punch line."

The essence intent 30 includes being intent 42. In therapy, an identification of essence intent 30 keeps a therapist from getting caught up in content and/or process. Rather, it allows therapists to understand the intent of an individual in a given interaction.

Essence intent 30 is the intent of a person for saying or doing something. When someone identifies enough essence intent 30 they eventually come down to being intent 42. Being intent 42 answers the questions of, what is this person trying to do in the world, and how is it manifest in everything they do. At some point very early in life there was some incident of non- satiation which the individual became fixated upon. That fixation translated itself into everything else that they do. Once the therapist finds the person's being intent 42, the therapist can work from an integration stand point to integrate it and thereby, all the disintegrations that followed after it will rapidly fall into place. Sometimes it is necessary to get through some of the other more superficial disintegrations to get down to a more primary disintegration. Deprogramming strategies 32 are strategies that utilize a lot of the technology to thwart a person' s potential attempt to protect their faults or their fears (e.g., phopias) . Essentially instead of attacking a structure that is based on a fear, the practitioner builds another structure that is strong and supported by consistent information. Once the stronger structure is in place, the practitioner transitions the person to that structure and the fear structure collapses. To do this the practitioner talks around a nonintegrated issue, constructing concepts around the issue in such a way that it is not the only thing that is supporting their belief system. Then, when the disintegration is uncovered, they literally have a strong place to go as opposed to trying desperately to fight for the only thing that they believe in. They have another belief to rely upon that is more consistent and integrated.

Loading 34 includes a sub-set called reflexes 44. If the practitioner looks at an individual while they are communicating it is almost like there is a pulse or strobe-like effect. They go from expression to expression to expression. This pattern corresponds with idea associations as the person thinks. For example, the person may see an ad on TV about Christmas and the person may think of a past Christmas of theirs, which leads the person to remember a red dress that their mother wore, and that red dress gives the person a feeling of comfort. That feeling of comfort reminds the person of a time when they were a baby, being held by their father who had hairy arms and the hair on his arms might remind them of the hair that the person has on their arms now. Human thought patterns go from intellectual associations through intellectual associations through emotional associations. There is a whole series of thinking, feeling and sense memory associations. With each one of these transitions the physical body takes on a certain aspect of that physical transition depending on the emotion that is triggered and the amount of data that comes from that transition, or the amount of emotional charge. By watching a person's reflexes, or by listening to the stressors in the person's voice (reflexes 44 can be heard in the voice as well as seen) , one can ascertain a tremendous amount of information about the person without the person conciously transmitting it. In fact, the person does not even have to be speaking if the practitioner is sensitive enough. For example, while talking to a person the practitioner may mention the concepts of "my father' and "my mother." For the listener to understand "father" and "mother" they must load in a concept of father and a concept of mother (this gets to loading 34) . If the concept of "mother" has a lot of emotion to it, when the individual loads in mother there will be a more profound shift in their physiology when mother is mentioned. This demonstrates to the practitioner that there is more emotional charge and emotionality behind mother than behind father. Learning to see these pulses gives the practitioner this type of information. These pulses can also be seen on video and or heard on audio .

Parts balance 36 refers to the different parts or aspects of a person's personality. The practitioner recognizes that different parts may be at different stages of development and in a sense a whole different experience set. What the practitioner seeks to do, instead of trying to integrate the parts together, is to develop the parts so that they can grow and grow together to be on equal footing and force. For example, suppose a person has developed two parts, a more developed mature part and a less developed child like innocent part. If the mature part has developed into the extreme, an angry, a mean part, and the practitioner tries to integrate it with the innocent part, the less developed part with the mature stronger part, it may, in effect be unbalanced. The less developed part could be crushed. It could therefore in effect cripple the person's ultimate potential .

The non-integration or disintegration 38 includes ineffective non transcendant emotions 48. Non-integration or disintegration 38 can be illustrated by an analogy. A person has goals, objectives and things that they want to achieve. This can be viewed like a sled with a bunch of sled dogs out in front. Let's say there are 10 sled dogs pulling the sled toward a goal and the person is the sled. A disintegration 38 is a sled dog that is going in a different direction. Most people strive for certain goals but for most of them, goals are only wishes. A person moves toward the goals, but then something seems to stop them so that the person never seems to have an absolute directed progression toward them. This is because being disintegrated 38 is like having the sled dogs all going in different directions. So the sled never really moves forward very far. Adults have disintegrations. This is because when a* person is a child learning to be an adult and learning about the world, the person can only learn things from a child's perspective. That perspective is based on a child's understanding of the world, a child's intellect, and a child's wisdom. But these teachings become the cornerstones of the whole adult reality. Most of the strategies used by an adult, on a day to day basis, were developed based on a child's logic and intellect. Bodily function, intelligence and emotions 48 are a sub-set of nonintegration or disintegration 38 and include define, cause and remove.

A series of mechanisms may be used to remove disintegrations 38. These may include boundary testing, postulate methodology, reflexes, loading, exploration of meaning technology, experimental learning technology (i.e., the switch), Boolean logic and projective methodology. Within the sub-set of emotions 48 are emotional definitions. Emotions include, for example, fight or flight, joy, satiation (all negative emotions trace back to fear) . Fear (phobia) is always a lack of data. When a person fears something they tend to run away from that thing which they fear. This becomes almost like a self- fulfilling prophecy, which relates to non-integration or disintegration 38.

Therapy by number 40 leads to primitives 46 and postulates. There are primitives 46 and postulates in both learning and therapy. Learning primitives are the base concepts that a person uses, concepts of something increasing, concepts of something existing, something not existing, two things being added together, etc. Some of them are data concepts and some of them are process concepts. Atomic units and patterns within learning are defined. For example, atomic units of piano playing would be the different techniques of how to hit the keys and the different drills of practicing with the fingers. Once a person has these atomic units, the patterns generated by them are classical music, jazz music, etc., that allows the person to fill out the whole space of the instrument.

Primitives 46 and postulates with respect to prospective therapy 24 are base emotional primitives that a person can and/or needs to have, which form a complete basis (i.e., a methodology used in linear algebra) of a complete set of all human behaviors. Unfortunately, many people either do not have a complete set of primitives 46 or have primitives 46 that are misdirected. Those primitives 46 can be formed so that each person has the basic elements to have a complete personality and complete range of expression. Having each primitive completely developed gives the individual ultimate flexibility across the behavioral and emotional range of being human .

Therapy by number or exploration of meaning or EM technology 40 includes a whole process of, in a simplistic sense, taking what a person says, and presents (communicates both conciously and unconciously) and the linguistic surface structure of meaning, and finding the deep structure which represents the internal representation and deep meaning of what they present. This process leads to uncovering the disintegrations 38 the person has.

Prospective therapy 24 deals with the person in their present state, with their present resources and allows them to move forward to a state of being that is called "integrated" or balanced. What other therapies do is to examine the past or to go into the past. If they work in the past, and change things in the past, there is the potential to collapse the present. These processes can cause all sorts of additional problems like feelings of worthlessness and listlessness . What prospective therapy 24 does is to take the person's present resources and take them forward to make them more complete as opposed to looking at the person's in-completions now, running into the past, and trying to back fill them.

The learning 18 includes philosophic primitives of intelligence 50, executive success program 52, and intelligence building 54. Hereinafter, the executive success program 52 will be denoted as ESP. The ESP 52 includes teacher skills 56, atomic units and patterns 58, mission theory 60, community and branches 62, modules, including practices and inquiries 64, strategies and patterns 66, systems learning 68, and athletics 70. The modules, including practices and inquiries 64 include LLI (Life Learning Institute) optimization 72. The strategies and patterns 66 include cheating and devaluation 74. Cheating and devaluation 74 includes shifter 76. The systems learning 68 includes emotional learning 78, inductive learning 80, integrative steps 82, deductive learning 84, and experiential learning 86. The integrative steps 82 include first principles base elements 84. The first principles base elements 84 include minimal basis 86.

FIG. 2 illustrates a diagram of the rational inquiry method 10 interfaced with a computer system 100, an audio visual system 102, internet, intranet, world wide web, a hard-copy format 104, and a seminar 106. The computer system 100, the audio visual system 102, the hard copy format 104, and the seminar 106 may also be interfaced together. The rational inquiry method 10 may interact with a student through a computer system 100 giving questions and answers leading to predetermined results. The audio visual system 102 may include any suitable means such as, a video tape system, a disc system, a movie film, etc. The rational inquiry method 10 may be presented on any suitable hard copy format 104, such as, a book, pamphlet, printed pages, etc. The rational inquiry method 10 may be presented in a seminar 106 with a teacher. The teacher may ask questions leading each pupil in the class to answer and to explore meaning. Additionally, the seminar 106 may include coaches to help lead small discussion groups, within which members of discussion group can share ideas leading to answers. Furthermore, each member of the group may have their own coach to provide individual help and guidance in reaching individual goals.

FIG. 3 illustrates a listing of the modules, including practices and inquiries 64 included in the ESP 52 of the rational inquiry method 10. The modules, including practices and inquiries are provided hereinafter in The Appendix. ESP 52 module 1 includes rules and rituals and a scripting module. The rules and rituals and scripting module include handshaking, rules and rituals, an introduction to the basic modules, including practices and inquiries 64 and scripting. The purpose of the rules and rituals and scripting module is for students to develop a deep appreciation and understanding of the ESP 52.

Students are taught that handshaking includes a basic handshake, and an ESP 52 handshake. Students wear sashes or scarves to signify rank. The sashes or scarves come in different color signifying measurable achievement and contribution to the ESP 52 mission. Promotion and rank are awarded to students to measure the individual's progress. Pictures of the founders may be displayed to show respect and to give tribute. In order to provide a feeling of intimacy and comfort all people entering the session area are required to remove their shoes .

Students who reach a given level may be given a title and/or a sash of a given color. Bowing is a show of respect and students bow when entering and leaving a session space. At the beginning and end of a session, the highest rank officially calls the group together with the ESP 52 handclap. The class stands, repeats the ESP 52 handclap in unison, and bows to the person leading the session. The leading person then returns the bow. The ESP 52 twelve point mission statement is recited before the start of each ESP 52 session.

Students are taught scripting to plan what the student is going to say to achieve a desired result. Scripting includes a statement of truth, a statement of need and a take away.

ESP 52 module 2 includes a communications and being at cause module. The purpose of this module is to understand how human perception filters incoming information, creates a student's emotional response and drives the student's behavior so that the student may recognize that they have a choice in all areas of their life.

Students choose their responses and behaviors. Taking responsibility for that choice at all times is being "at cause."

There are three types of emotions including correspondence control emotions, vested interest emotions, and immature emotions. The correspondence control emotions are emotions that students use in response to other student's behavior to try to control or change the other student's behavior. Vested interest emotions come from beliefs and perceptions that a student wants to maintain because changing them would require a change in behavior that the student is unwilling to make. Immature emotions are emotions that a student has not yet defined as being either of the correspondence control emotions or vested interest emotions. Exploring these emotions reveals that they are either correspondence control emotions or vested interest emotions .

ESP 52 module 3 includes an honesty disclosure module. The purpose of the honesty disclosure module is to create an integrated understanding of honesty and disclosure so that students can apply the concepts and become more consistent in every area of life.

Honesty is being free from fraud or deception. ESP 52 defines honesty as the intent to share in a non-distorted fashion. Being whole is being integrated which creates consistency in behavior. Contradiction and inconsistency in behavior is a sign of non-integration. Needs are necessary for survival. Desires are non-integrated fixations, not necessary for survival . They give a student pleasure or move the student away from pain. Fear is a reaction to an imagined outcome. All fear is a lack of data, and therefore lessened with data. Failure in the physical realm is pain versus pleasure. In the emotional realm, sadness versus happiness. In the thought realm, detraction versus affirmation.

ESP 52 module 4 includes a module on rapport and excited state. The purpose of the rapport and excited state module is to give students a set of skills that produce and check rapport consistently and increase the effectiveness of communication. The coach demonstrates and leads the students to conclusions. Pacing is matching or mirroring some aspect of the other student's behavior. It is not mimicking because mimicking causes the other student to feel uncomfortable . Pacing must be done out of respect for the other student. Leading is moving the student's communication, after establishing rapport. For example, a student can establish rapport and enter the world of someone who is unhappy. Then the student can lead them to happiness. Polar is opposite. It is mismatching. For example, if a first student leans forward, a second student leans back. The purpose of building an excited state is to teach the student the ability to generate intense emotional states easily to convey enthusiasm at will . Students who demonstrate enthusiasm are better able to communicate and sell their ideas with ease.

ESP 52 module 5 includes a module dealing with persistence and motivation. The purpose of this module is to give students the tools to build a new, personal inner knowledge and strength, so that they can affect their destiny through commitment and persistence. The coaches lead the students to realize what persistence is with respect to inner word.

ESP 52 module 6 includes a module on intensity and power State. The purpose of this module is for the students to become more focused and present during daily activities, to become aware of their intensity level throughout the day and to learn to increase intensity at will affording them a fuller experience of life. The coaches lead and demonstrate to the students how to achieve intensity and power. A full range of emotions includes "positive" emotions as well as "negative" emotions. A range gives a student a depth of feeling or presence in experience, and this depth is referred to as one's emotional bandwidth. A peak intensity state is something a student would experience as if their life depended on it (fight or flight) . This state may be only momentary at first but with practice a person can build emotional endurance. Spastic movement is when muscle tension causes jerky or involuntary stiff movements. This can happen in intense states because often the student is unaware of the tension the intense state produces. The switch is a term used to describe the mechanism that turns off rational control of a student's emotions and behaviors, moving the student into lower brain fight or flight activity. The fight or flight response is the body's natural mechanism when something from the outside world signals the need to respond quickly. This is experienced as fear or anger and it triggers- an adrenaline surge in the body. A power state is an emotional state of optimal physical and emotional readiness and strength that can be accessed at will. It is a state where a student can harness consciously the power of the fight or flight response and harness conciously the power of their adrenaline. A trigger is a stimulus-response mechanism. The trigger for an emotional state is the set of physiological and/or emotional circumstances, which produce the state. Changing a student's physiology can change the student's emotional state. By understanding this principle students can learn how to re-access resourceful states by taking on a particular physiology pattern.

ESP 52 module 7 includes a work value module. The purpose of this module is to teach the student the meaning of value and to give the student a clear understanding of what work is. There are two types of values. Objective value is something that is valuable to the entire human team. Objective value is anything that saves time and effort and is forward moving for mankind. Individual value is a more aesthetic thing as something may be valuable to one individual but not another. For example, an heirloom may be valuable to one individual but not another. Work is that which produces measurable results. Work is measured by results. Virtual work (a physics term applied to human performance) produces no results or value.

ESP 52 module 8 includes a self-esteem module. The purpose of this module is to give students an integrated understanding of self-esteem sequitur and how to raise self-esteem to enable individuals to give and take with integrity.

Coaches review honesty and integrity with the students. Honesty is the intent to represent a student's reality as accurately as possible. Integrity is about being consistent not about being honest. A lie is when one trades reality for fantasy. It is a distortion of reality that the student knows about. Self-esteem is the range of possibilities that the student has in a given context. Students with high self-esteem believe that they have many choices in a given context. They see themselves as causing agents in the world and can make things happen. Students with low self-esteem feel like they have no choice and are victims, at the whim of the world with no say and no control, which makes them totally reactive. The raising and lowering of self-esteem has to do with the integrity of giving and taking. Giving and taking in integrity, with consistency in a merit based system raises self-esteem. ESP 52 or the essential school provides this. Giving and taking in ways that are inconsistent always lowers self-esteem and therefore are not in integrity. Lying always decreases choice and self-esteem. ESP 52 module 9 includes a good and bad module. Good is pro-survival and the building of value. Bad is counter survival and the destruction of value. A world without intelligence does not have good and bad or good and evil . Evil comes from intelligence .

ESP 52 module 10 includes the parasite/producer concepts module. The purpose of this module is for students to understand and identify parasite and effort strategies, so that they can rid themselves of parasite patterns, employ all effort strategies raising capability and self-esteem and to protect against being manipulated or taken advantage of by others . The coaches lead the students to learn about the parasites. Parasite strategies keep people dependent on others and lower self-esteem. Effort strategies create independence and raise self-esteem. The parasite is dependent on the world. Parasites are nice when the chips are down or when life is hard for them. When things are good and they don't need anything they have a tendency to change, they can become mean, abusive or self- destructive. A producer's internal state is separate and distinct from conditions in the outside world, therefore they remain the same whether life is easy or difficult with regard to how they treat others. The term parasite is not a value judgement .

ESP 52 module 11 includes parasite/producer strategies. The coaches lead the students to learn about parasite/producer strategies. Envy is when someone has something you want and you would take it from that person to make yourself feel better. It is destructive in nature. Jealousy is when someone has something you want, and you recognize that you want it. It is not destructive in nature. The root of the word means overly zealous. Parasites take more than they give. Parasites are dependent on others for their survival . Producers give more than they take. This person is independent and capable of sustaining self . A passer through is someone who gives only as much as he/she takes.

ESP 52 module 12 includes parasite/producer practice. This is a practice session of parasite patterns. All parasitic strategies lower self-esteem and therefore destroy value. The objective of all parasite strategies is to obligate either without consent or with misunderstood consent. The objective is to recognize parasitic patterns and interrupt them so no one is obligated.

ESP 52 module 13 includes a module about crime and punishment . The purpose of this module is for students to explore their beliefs and attitudes concerning ethics, justice, crime and punishment, and to learn how ethics are upheld in a just system. Ethics are well-formed consistent postulates by which we live. An ethic is an internal guide, something that the student has personally derived from experience and is personal to the student. A rule is a guideline that is based on an ethic. Rules make life easier. Without ethics behind them, the rules are worthless. Ethics are causes, rules are effects. Rule-bound people are fear based and follow rules mainly to avoid the consequences. Ethics-bound people are value based, and there is integrity and a certain consistency or wholeness to their actions. When one violates one's ethics the contradiction causes fragmentation of the whole person, and lowers self-esteem and limits one's options. The students are taught concepts of punishment. Hurt plus surplus is a form of punishment when a person hurts others intentionally and therefore believes that any hurt is intentional. An eye for an eye is a form of punishment when a person believes that if the other person knew how bad this hurt they would never do such a thing. A hurt minus surplus punishment is a person who has trouble with any concept of punishment .

The students explore concepts of forgiveness. Forgive everyone means that the person does not believe in punishment because if they forgive everyone, everyone is the same. Forgiving with integrity means that a student believes that the punishment fits the appropriate sentence in a consistent ethical evaluation. Forgiving without integrity uses favoritism, bigotry and prejudice. Forgiving this way is prejudice.

ESP 52 module 14 includes a module about a shifter. The purpose of the module is to teach students how to identify shifter strategies to limit their use in the world. The students are taught that a shifter's objective is to devalue all that is good. The way people take something that is valuable and destroy it is through value inversion or taking something that is good and making it seem bad.

ESP 52 module 15 includes a module about tribute. The purpose of this module is to help a student build inner independence by defining him/her self and giving tribute to others whom have contributed to who the student is. To build an inner appreciation for others and ourselves and the gift of living in an advance society. Edification is speaking highly of and/or acknowledging another. Literally to edify means to instruct .

ESP 52 module 16 includes a module about money. The purpose of this module is to integrate the student's perception of money.

ESP 52 module 17 includes a mission module. Students are taught that to raise ethics is to better us and to better society. This increases value and is good. To decrease technology or stop knowledge is the destruction of value and is therefore bad. Stopping development is closing our eyes to the truth out of fear, which is counterproductive.

ESP 52 module 18 includes a personal value inventory. The purpose of this module is to integrate the students' s perception about value, wealth and success. Students learn to identify the key elements of being successful along with a process to evaluate their personal skills, a fair market value of these skills, and how to increase that value for the purpose of creating a complete success plan. Wealth is one's self esteem in a given area or the range of possibilities the person has in that area. The ability one has to bring one's ideas into form. Success is action plus a plan. The student cannot be successful without action. The students are taught levels of value. Levels 0 and 1 are similar in that they are the lowest levels of functioning in society. These levels are completely reactive in nature. The only choice here is whether or not to do the job. The difference between level 0 and 1 is that the level 1 job is either harder or less desirable. Levels 2 and 3 are similarly coupled. A level 2 has a certain set of tasks and can choose when to do them. A level 3 has developed a trait or talent, gotten into a situation where he/she can prioritize or learn to do several things at once, or to take responsibility and get authority. levels 0 to 3 production are not linked with compensation. Levels 4 and 5 are the first levels that do not work on a parasitic basis. The quantity and quality of work determine the pay, and there is profit sharing or commission. The level 5 individual has developed a special skill or talent making them more valuable. Level 6 is a break point. This level makes tools that others use or teaches people a new skill that increases their value. This level builds value that is used by others. This method is a natural evolution in society. Level 7 is not a natural evolution in society. Something is developed that would not have been developed anyway, for example, a helicopter. Level 8 is a contribution that is retrospective in nature, once it is invented it changes everything. Everything that comes after a level 8 step is affected by it. Level 9 is something that creates a whole new industry. A whole new field of human endeavor and thought, for example, the computer.

A student's skills are like poker chips in a poker game. They are the valuables that the student brings into the world. The student establishes a fair market value by understanding the amount of money that the student will be paid for what the student has. It is best for the student to sell their skills to the highest bidder.

ESP 52 module 19 includes goal setting. The purpose of this module is to teach the student how to set and implement goals. FIG. 4 illustrates a flow chart for goal setting. Step 1 is to define a present state (physically, emotionally and thoughtwise) . Step 2 is to define the goal and its difference from the present state (physically, emotionally and thoughtwise) . Step 3 is to define intermediate steps by all steps that must be stated in positives, all steps must be within the student's control, all steps must be prioritized with respect to each other, and every step must be attainable if all the steps before it are done. Step 4 is to define the highest priority step that can be done. Step 5 is to schedule the completion of the student's highest priority step. Step 6 is to repeat the process once the student completes a step (reaches the due date) , thereafter, the student must immediately repeat steps 1 through 5. The student is in scheduled contact with a coach to help the student progress toward the student's goal.

ESP 52 module 20 includes time and lists. This module teaches the student a set of skills that will enable the student to become more proactive and less reactive in their lives. The student is taught that active/proactive is choosing the student's actions to move towards a predetermined goal or objective. For example, its steering the boat rather than just being along for the ride. Reactive is the pattern of behavior exhibited when a student in a responsive mode, addresses situations as they arise rather than choosing the direction he/she wants to move in. For example, it is like being along for a roller coaster ride. The student is taught the "STAR" formula which is an acronym that stands for Stop, Think, Act, and Respond. The "STAR" formula is used whenever something comes up this facilitates the exercise of freewill. The student is led through a time exercise that teaches about projected time, estimated time, and actual time. Projected time is an estimated time for a project to be completed. Estimated time is how long the student thinks the project took. Actual time is the time that the student actually took to complete the project. Through this activity, the student determines whether their internal clock is slow, accurate, or fast and learns how to use their internal clock.

ESP module 21 includes a module about what is. The purpose of this module is to teach the student a method for staying in the present moment so that they can be more effective in everything they do. Through exercises the student learns that by being seduced into the past is useless, unless the information helps in the present. For example, "If only I knew this, it would have been different" is useless information. The only reason to go into the past is to gather data to learn with full knowledge that the student is in the present, searching his/her memory banks for data that would be useful to us now. Many students live in the future, creating fantasies about what might happen, reading meaning into everything that occurs and projecting how it will affect the student in the future. The more the student moves into the future or the past the more the student moves out of reality. Only the present is real. The student is taught that beliefs are assumptions that the student accepts as reality. They have a certain rigidity causing an inflexibility in the student's behavior. Assumptions and postulates are hypotheses about reality. They may or may not be correct. Data, like scientific criteria, is measurable in that it has consistency. Opinions have an individualized nature to them, they are hypotheses that the student draws from his/her internal data. Content is data. Process is what is being done with the data. The state of "what is" requires the student to utilize content as opposed to process. In order to get into the present people must get totally out of blame, totally out of story telling. Story telling is justification and blame.

The foregoing description of the present invention has been presented for purposes of illustration and description. It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form disclosed, and many modifications and variations are possible in light of the above teaching. Such modifications and variations that may be apparent to a person skilled in the art are intended to be included within the scope of this invention.


CLAIMS  (OCR text may contain errors)
What is claimed is :
1 . A method comprising : a) at least one of providing, determining, or utilizing a matrix of consistent human internal existence; b) at least one of providing, determining, or utilizing a matrix of consistent reality; and c) arriving at a disintegration by comparing the matrix of consistent human internal existence to the matrix of consistent reality.
2. The method of claim 1, wherein the steps of a) and b) further comprise: examining freewill and deterministic views of human existence .
3. The method of claim 1, wherein the steps of a) and b) further comprises: reconciling into a consistent framework the freewill and deterministic views of human existence.
4. The method of claim 1, wherein the steps of a) and b) further comprise: deriving a limitation of human sensation.
5. The method of claim 1, wherein the steps of a) and b) further comprise: deriving a limitation of human perception.
6. The method of claim 1, wherein the steps of a) and b) further comprise: deriving a limitation of human cognition.
7. The method of claim 1, wherein the steps of a) tand b) further comprise : deriving a limitation of human belief.
8. The method of claim 8, wherein the steps of a) and b) further comprises: quantifying limitations of human belief to discover extent of human potentials.
9. The method of claim 1, wherein the steps of a) and b) further comprises : determining where internal existence is inconsistent; determining a limiting belief from this inconsistency; determining a disintegration supporting this limiting belief; and wherein the step of arriving further includes : facilitating the awareness of the disintegration; allowing an individual to integrate the awareness; and removing the limiting belief.
10. The method of claim 9, wherein inconsistent internal existence is upheld by a postulate.
11. The method of claim 9, wherein the inconsistent internal existence is manifest in one of: a bodily function; a intellectual function; a emotional function; and combinations thereof
12. The method of claim 9, wherein the inconsistent internal existence is manifest in a phobia.
13. The method of claim 9, wherein the inconsistent internal existence is manifest in disease.
14. The method of claim 9, wherein the inconsistent internal existence is manifest in a bodily, emotional, intellectual, or combination thereof, condition.
15. The method of claim 9, wherein the inconsistent internal existence is manifest in a bodily, emotional, intellectual, or combination thereof, ability.
16. The method of claim 9, wherein the inconsistent internal existence is manifest in a bodily, emotional, intellectual, or combination thereof, performance.
17. The method of claim 1, further comprising removing the disintegration using projective methodology.
18. The method of claim 1, wherein at least one of the matrices is minimally assumptive.
