Jehovah's Witnesses 



Jehovah's 
Witnesses 



by 

ANTHONY A. HOEKEMA 



WILLIAM B. EERDMANS PUBLISHING COMPANY 
Grand Rapids, Michigan 



' Copyright 1963 Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co. 

All rights reserved 

ISBN 0-8028-1489-1 

Printed in the United States of America 



The material in this book is an updating of 

material originally appearing in The Four 

Major Cults, Fourth printing, August 1972. 



Reprinted, March 1986 



Contents 



Abbreviations 6 

Preface 7 

I. History 9 

Charles Taze Russell 9 

Joseph Franklin Rutherford 14 

Nathan Homer Knorr 18 

Statistics and Activities 20 

II. Source of Authority 25 

Norm for Interpreting Scripture 25 

Method of Interpreting Scripture 37 

III. Doctrines 45 
Doctrine of God 45 
Doctrine of Man 55 
Doctrine of Christ 60 
Doctrine of Salvation 70 
Doctrine of the Church and Sacraments 77 
Doctrine of the Last Things 85 

IV. Appendix: Jehovah- Witness Teaching on 

the Person of Christ 122 

A Revival of Arianism 122 

Critique of Watchtower Exegesis 126 

Bibliography 142 



Abbreviations 



ASV 

KJ 

NWT 

Paradise Lost 

Religion for Mankind 

RSV 

Survival After Death 

You May Survive Armageddon 
Your Will Be Done 



American Standard Version 
King James Version 
New World Translation, 1961 ed. 
From Paradise Lost to Paradise 

Regained 
What Has Religion Done for 

Mankind? 
Revised Standard Version 
What Do the Scriptures Say 

about "Survival After Death"? 
You May Survive Armageddon 

into God's New World 
Your Will Be Done on Earth 



(Note: All Scripture quotations not otherwise identified are from 
the American Standard Version.) 



Preface 



The discussion of Jehovah's Witnesses found in this book is orga- 
nized as follows: First, a brief history of the movement is given, in 
terms of the events that occurred during the presidencies of Charles 
Russell, Joseph Rutherford, and Nathan Knorr. Next comes a sum- 
mary of statistics and activities. Then the question of the final source 
of authority for the group is taken up. The doctrines taught by Je- 
hovah's Witnesses are next expounded in the order of the customary 
divisions of Christian theology: God, man, Christ, salvation, the 
church, the last things. An appendix critically examines Jehovah- 
Witness teaching on the person of Christ. 

In setting forth the teachings of Jehovah's Witnesses, I have used 
primary sources exclusively (Watchtower Society publications). 
Whenever there was uncertainty about what was being taught on a 
certain doctrinal point, information was obtained directly from 
Watchtower leaders. References to the source materials used are 
given in the footnotes. A bibliography lists primary sources, Bible 
translations, histories of Jehovah's Witnesses, and a number of gen- 
eral works. 

Readers of this book are referred to the author's Four Major Cults 
(Eerdmans, 1963) for further material. One will find in this last- 
named volume an appendix, not found in the present work, which 
deals critically with teachings common to both Jehovah's Witnesses 
and Seventh-day Adventists on "soul-extinction" in the intermediate 
state and on the final annihilation of the wicked. Besides setting forth 
the doctrinal teachings of Christian Science, Mormonism, and Sev- 
enth-day Adventism, The Four Major Cults also includes chapters 
on the challenge of the cults, the distinctive traits of the cult, and the 
approach to the cultist. 

7 



8 Jehovah's Witnesses 

May the Lord use this book for the advancement of His kingdom 
and for the glory of His name. May He particularly use it to lead 
many from the errors of the Watchtower to the truth as it is in Christ. 

Anthony A. Hoekema 
Grand Rapids, Michigan 
July, 1972 



I. History 



Charles Taze Russell 

The history of Jehovah's Witnesses is very closely tied in 
with the history of the three presidents of the organization who 
have so far held office. The first of these was Charles Taze Russell 
(1852-1916).' He was born in the town of Allegheny, now part 
of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, on February 16, 1852. His parents 
were Presbyterians of Scotch-Irish descent. At the age of fifteen 
Russell was already in partnership with his father, operating a 
chain of men's clothing stores. By this time he had joined the 
Congregational Church, finding it more to his liking than the 
Presbyterian. 

Russell was soon troubled, however, by some of the doctrines 
taught in this church, the doctrines of predestination and eternal 
punishment giving him particular difficulty. By the time he was 
seventeen, in fact, he had become an avowed skeptic, discarding 
the Bible altogether. He explains how this happened in these 
words : 

Brought up a Presbyterian, indoctrinated from the Catechism, 
and being naturally of an inquiring mind, I fell a ready prey 
to the logic of infidelity, as soon as I began to think for myself. 
But that which at first threatened to be the utter shipwreck of 
faith in God and the Bible was, under God's providence, over- 

1 This biographical sketch is based chiefly on material found in two 
Watchtower publications: Qualified to he Ministers (Brooklyn, 1955), pp. 
297-312; and Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose (Brooklyn, 1959), 
pp. 14-63. Except where otherwise indicated, the information which 
follows has been gathered from the above-mentioned volumes. 

9 



10 Jehovah's Witnesses 

ruled for good, and merely wrecked my confidence in human 
creeds and systems of Bible misinterpretations. a 

One day in 1 870 he dropped into a dusty, dingy basement hall 
near his Allegheny store 

to see if the handful who met there had anything more sensible 
to offer than the creeds of the great churches. There, for the 
first time, I heard something of the views of Second Adventism, 
by Jonas Wendell. . . . 

Though his Scripture exposition was not entirely clear, and 
though it was very far from what we now rejoice in, it was 
sufficient, under God, to re-establish my wavering faith in the 
Divine inspiration of the Bible. . . . 3 

His interest in Bible study aroused to fever pitch, Russell now 
organized a Bible class of six members who agreed to meet regu- 
larly. This group met in Pittsburgh from 1870-1875. Russell and 
his associates were disappointed by the Adventist view that 
Christ was coming again in the flesh, being convinced that His 
Second Coming would be a spiritual or invisible one. Russell 
therefore issued a pamphlet entitled The Object and Manner oj 
the Lord's Return, of which some 50,000 copies were published. 

In 1876 Russell came into contact with N. H. Barbour of Roch- 
ester, New York. Barbour was the leader of a group of disaffected 
Adventists who had left that movement because they, like Russell, 
believed that the Second Coming of Christ was to be a spiritual, 
non-visible one. The Pittsburgh group and the Rochester group 
now joined, with the result that the magazine The Herald oj the 
Morning, formerly published by Barbour, became a joint venture. 
In 1877 Barbour and Russell jointly published a 194-page book 
entitled Three Worlds or Plan oj Redemption. 

- Watchtower magazine, 1916, pp. 170-71; quoted in Jehovah's Wit- 
nesses in the Divine Purpose, p. 14. Note here a typical cult phenomenon: 
the rejection of all "human creeds." 

s Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, p. 14. It is important to 
note that, by his own admission, it was the Adventists who delivered Russell 
from his early skepticism. Though the term "Second Adventism" which is 
used in the quotation does not represent any known Adventist denomination, 
I conclude, from the similarities which exist between Seventh-day Adventist 
doctrines and Jehovah-Witness teachings, that this group was either a Sev- 
enth-day Adventist congregation, or a group of Adventists who held doc- 
trines similar to those of Seventh-day Adventism. From the Adventists Rus- 
sell obviously borrowed such doctrines as the extinction of the soul at 
death, the annihilation of the wicked, the denial of hell, and a modified 
form of the investigative judgment. 



History 1 1 

This book set forth their belief that Christ's second presence 
began invisibly in the fall of 1874 and thereby commenced a 
forty-year harvest period. Then, remarkably accurately, they 
set forth the year 1914 as the end of the Gentile times. . . . 4 

In a few years, however, Russell broke with Barbour because 
the latter began to deny that the death of Christ was the ransom 
price for Adam and his race. Russell now started a new periodical 
called lion's Watch Tower and Herald of Christ's Presence, the 
first issue coming off the press on July 1, 1879. 5 

The new magazine proved to be an important factor in the ex- 
pansion of the movement. By 1880, for example, some thirty 
congregations had come into existence in seven states. Zion's 
Watch Tower Tract Society was established as an unincorporated 
body in 1881, with Russell as its manager. On December 13, 
1884, this Society was granted a legal charter and was organized 
as a corporation; we may therefore recognize this date as the 
official beginning of the Jehovah's Witness movement." The 
purpose of the society, as stated in Article II of the charter, was 
"the dissemination of Bible truths in various languages by means 
of the publication of tracts, pamphlets, papers and other religious 
documents, and by the use of all other lawful means. . . ." 7 

In accordance with this purpose Russell now issued the first of 
what was eventually to become a 7-volume series of doctrinal 
books. This first volume, appearing in 1886, was called The Di- 
vine Plan of the Ages. The entire series, first called Millennial 
Dawn, later came to be called Studies in the Scriptures. These 
books had a wide circulation; over six million copies of the first 
volume were distributed. 

In 1889 the society acquired a building in Allegheny, Pennsyl- 
vania, which served as its headquarters for the next twenty years. 

4 Qualified to be Ministers, p. 300. It will be noted, therefore, that 
as early as 1877 Russell specified that Christ had invisibly returned 
in 1874. 

Though at first this magazine was published monthly, in 1892 it 
began to appear semi-monthly. In 1909 its name was changed to 
The Watch Tower and Herald of Christ's Presence; in 1939 the name 
became The Wutchtower and Herald of Christ's Kingdom; later in that 
same year the title by which it still appears was assumed: The Watch- 
tower Announcing Jehovah's Kingdom (Jehovah's Witnesses in the 
Divine Purpose, p. 21, note m). 

" Though at first the society went by the above-mentioned name, in 
1896 the name was changed to Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 
of Pennsylvania (Qualified to be Ministers, p. 303). 

" Ibid., p. 304. 



12 Jehovah's Witnesses 

Russell made his first trip abroad in 1891, and in 1900 the society's 
first branch office was established in London. Soon books and 
pamphlets began to be published in languages other than English. 
In 1903, while Russell was on a second European tour, a branch 
of the society was set up in Germany; in 1904 one was opened in 
Australia. 

A new avenue of expansion opened up when, in 1908, Joseph 
Franklin Rutherford, the society's legal counselor, obtained prop- 
erty for the society in Brooklyn, New York. In order to hold this 
property, the society had to form another corporation; hence in 
1909 the People's Pulpit Association of New York was incor- 
porated. 8 

In Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose it is said that 
during the years 1909-1914 Russell's sermons were sent out weekly 
to about 3,000 newspapers in the United States, Canada, and 
Europe (p. 50). Martin and Klann, however, in their Jehovah 
of the Watchtower, give documentary evidence to prove that in 
many cases these sermons were never delivered, as reported, in 
the places claimed. From the Brooklyn Daily Eagle of February 
19, 1912, the authors quote a news story affirming that a sermon 
allegedly delivered by Russell in Honolulu on a certain date was 
never preached. 9 On a later page the authors reproduce a photo- 
static copy of a letter sent to the Brooklyn Daily Eagle by a Hono- 
lulu editor stating that on the designated day Russell had stopped 
in Honolulu for a few hours, but had made no public address. 1 " 

Martin and Klann also tell how Russell's periodical once adver- 
tised so-called "Miracle Wheat" for one dollar a pound, claiming 
that it would grow five times as fast as any other brand. After 
the Brooklyn Daily Eagle had published a cartoon ridiculing the 
"Pastor" and his "miracle wheat," Russell sued the newspaper for 
libel. When this wheat was investigated by government depart- 



R In 1956 the name of this corporation was changed to the one it now 
bears: Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc. There 
is also a British corporation, which was formed in 1914, under the name 
International Bible Students Association; it has a Brooklyn address as 
well as a London address. The work of the organization is done by 
all three of these corporations; it is the Pennsylvania corporation, how- 
ever, which is the controlling body and which provides the other cor- 
porations with financial support {Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Pur- 
pose, pp. 48-49). 

9 Walter R. Martin and Norman H. Klann, Jehovah of the Watchtower, 
rev. ed. (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1959), pp. 15-17. 
10 Ibid., opposite p. 30. 



History 1 3 

merits, however, it was found to be, not five times as good as, but 
slightly inferior to, ordinary wheat. Needless to say, the Eagle 
won the suit. 11 

It should be mentioned at this point that Russell was married 
in 1879 to Maria Frances Ackley. No children were born of this 
union. For many years Mrs. Russell was active in the Watchtower 
Society, serving as the first secretary-treasurer of the society and 
for many years as associate editor of the Watch Tower. In 1897, 
  however, she and Russell separated. In 1913 Mrs. Russell sued 
  her husband for divorce on the grounds of "his conceit, egotism, 
  domination, and improper conduct in relation to other women." 12 

  Russell's appalling egotism is evident from a comment made 
  by him about his Scripture Studies series : 

  . . . Not only do we find that people cannot see the divine 
  plan in studying the Bible by itself, but we see, also, that if 
  anyone lays the "Scripture Studies" aside, even after he has 
  used them, after he has become familiar with them, after he 
  has read them for ten years — if he then lays them aside and 
  ignores them and goes to the Bible alone, though he has under- 
  stood his Bible for ten years, our experience shows that within 
  two years he goes into darkness. On the other hand, if he had 
  merely read the "Scripture Studies" with their references and 
  had not read a page of the Bible as such, he would be in the 
  light at the end of two years, because he would have the light 
  of the Scriptures. 13 

  Russell, in other words, considered his books so indispensable for 
  the proper understanding of Scripture that without them one would 
  simply remain in spiritual darkness. 

  In June, 1912, the Rev. Mr. J. J. Ross, pastor of the James 
  Street Baptist Church of Hamilton, Ontario, published a denuncia- 
  tory pamphlet about Russell entitled Some Facts about the Self- 

  11 Ibid., p. 14. The authors quote from the Nov. 1, 1916, issue of the 
  Daily Eagle, which contained an obituary article about Russell. 

  12 Bruce M. Metzger, "The Jehovah's Witnesses and Jesus Christ," 
  Theology Today, April. 1953, pp. 65-66. Dr. Metzger refers his readers 
  to Herbert H. Stroup's The Jehovah's Witnesses (New York: Columbia 
  University Press, 1945), pp. 9-11, for a more detailed account of the 
  divorce proceedings. 

  is Watch Tower, Sept. 15, 1910, p. 298; quoted in Martin and Klann, 
  op. cit„ p. 24. See also J. K. Van Baalen's Chaos of Cults, 3rd ed., 
  p. 269, n. 2, where this same passage is quoted from the July, 1957. 
  Watchtower. 



  1 4 Jehovah's Witnesses 

  styled "Pastor," Charles T. Russell.™ Russell sued Ross for libel. 
  In the trial, which took place the following year, Russell was proved 
  to be a perjurer. When asked by Attorney Staunton, Ross's 
  lawyer, whether he knew the Greek alphabet, Russell replied, "Oh, 
  yes." When he was further asked to identify the Greek letters 
  on top of a page of the Greek Testament which was handed him, 
  he was unable to do so, finally admitting that he was not familiar 
  with the Greek language. 15 Russell, furthermore, had previously 
  claimed to have been ordained by a recognized religious body. 
  Staunton also pressed him on this point, finally asking him point- 
  blank, "Now, you never were ordained by a bishop, clergyman, 
  presbytery, council, or any body of men living?" Russell an- 
  swered, after a long pause, "I never was." 16 In this trial, there- 
  fore, Russell's deliberate perjury was established beyond doubt, 
  and the real character of the man looked up to by his followers as 
  an inspired religious teacher was clearly revealed. 

  Russell died on October 31, 1916, while aboard a train near 
  Pampa, Texas, on his way home from a California speaking trip. 
  It is claimed by Jehovah's Witnesses that during his lifetime he 
  traveled more than a million miles, gave more than 30,000 ser- 
  mons, and wrote books totalling over 50,000 pages. 17 

  Joseph Franklin Rutherford 

  On January 6, 1917, Joseph Franklin Rutherford, who had 
  been serving as the society's legal counselor, became the second 
  president of the Watchtower Society. 18 Rutherford was born on 
  November 8, 1869, in Booneville, Missouri, of Baptist parents. 
  When he was sixteen years old, he entered college for the purpose 
  of studying law. At the age of twenty-two he was admitted to the 
  bar and began to practice law, later serving four years as public 
  prosecutor for Booneville. Still later he was appointed special 
  judge for the Fourteenth Judicial District of Missouri. During 

  14 Martin and Klann, op. cil., p. 18. 

  10 Ibid., p. 20. The authors quote from a copy of the Russell- 
  vs.-Ross transcript on file in the Brooklyn headquarters of the Watch- 
  tower Society. 

  16 Ibid., p. 22. For the entire story of this trial, which includes 
  other examples of Russell's deliberate lying under oath, the reader is 
  referred to pp. 18-22 of Martin and Klann. 

  17 Qualified to be Ministers, p. 310. 

  i 8 This sketch of the history of the Jehovah's Witnesses during 
  Rutherford's presidency is based chiefly on pp. 312-32 of Qualified to be 
  Ministers, and on pp. 64-195 of Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose. 



  History 1 5 

  this time he occasionally served as substitute judge when the 
  regular judge was ill. Hence he came to be called "Judge" Ruth- 
  erford. In 1894 Rutherford came into contact with representatives 
  of the Watchtower Society; in 1906 he joined the movement; and 
  in 1907 he became the society's legal counselor. 

  When he became president, Rutherford proceeded at once to 
  reorganize the Brooklyn office and to encourage the members of 
  the society to engage in a more active program of witnessing. 
  Shortly after Rutherford's accession to the presidency, dissatis- 
  faction arose within the ranks of the society. This dissatisfaction 
  culminated in open rebellion, after which the leaders of the dis- 
  affected group were dismissed from their official positions. This 
  dismissal led to the formation of certain schismatic groups. 

  In July of 1917 the seventh volume of the Studies in the Scrip- 
  tures series, The Finished Mystery, was published. This book, 
  which was compiled by Watchtower editors from the writings of 
  Charles T. Russell, was chiefly a commentary on Revelation and 
  Ezekiel. A 4-page extract from this book entitled "The Fall of 
  Babylon" was distributed in great quantities to church members, 
  beginning on December 30, 1917. According to this tract, Cath- 
  olic and Protestant religious organizations together form present- 
  day Babylon which, it was predicted, would soon pass into obliv- 
  ion. The furor which the tract aroused soon led to governmental 
  action. In February of 1918 the Canadian government forbade 
  anyone to possess copies of Watchtower publications; it was alleged 
  that they contained seditious and anti-war statements. 19 William 
  J. Schnell, a former Jehovah's Witness who left the movement, as- 
  serts that during this time Rutherford was pursuing "a seemingly 
  anti-war editorial policy" in the Watchtower magazine. 20 In May 
  of 1918 warrants were issued by the United States District Court 
  of Eastern New York for the arrest of eight of the society's lead- 
  ers, including Rutherford, charging them with conspiring to cause 
  insubordination and refusal of duty in United States military and 
  naval forces. 21 On June 20 the eight were found guilty of these 
  charges, and the next day they were sentenced to twenty years 
  imprisonment in the federal penitentiary at Atlanta, Georgia. 22 

  19 Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, pp. 75-76. 

  20 Thirty Years a Watch Tower Slave (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1956), 
  p. 37. 

  - 1 Qualified to be Ministers, p. 315. 

  22 ibid. Actually, to eighty years, since they were sentenced to twenty 
  years each on four different counts (Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine 
  Purpose, p. 80). 



  16 Jehovah's Witnesses 

  The Brooklyn headquarters were now closed, operations of the 
  society being conducted, for the time being, from Pittsburgh. 
  After the war ended in November of 1918, society members be- 
  gan to petition their congressmen and governors for the release 
  of the Watchtower leaders. On May 14, 1919, the convictions of 
  the eight leaders were reversed, and soon thereafter they were set 
  free. 23 

  The Brooklyn office was now reopened, and the society received 
  a new lease on life. During the course of this year a second maga- 
  zine, The Golden Age, was launched, the first issue appearing on 
  October 1, 1919. 2 * 

  Printing activities were now expanded, the society deciding to 
  do all its own printing. In 1 92 1 the society published The Harp of 
    God, the first of a series of books by Rutherford, who proved to 
    be an even more prolific writer than Russell had been. 2s Soon 
    the Rutherford books were replacing Russell's volumes as standard 
    expositions of Watchtower doctrine. 

    In 1920 all the members of the congregations who participated 
    in the witnessing work of the society were required to turn in 
    weekly reports. William J. Schnell, whose Thirty Years a Watch 
    Tower Slave is a revealing account of the inner workings of the 
    movement, contends that during Rutherford's presidency there 
    emerged a basic change in Watchtower policies. Whereas em- 
    phasis had previously been laid on Bible study, character develop- 
    ment, and the cultivation of the fruits of the Spirit, all the stress 
    came to be laid on the placing of literature, the making of calls, 
    and the reporting of these calls to Watchtower Headquarters. 
    Schnell claims that as a result of this change of purpose, more 
    than three-fourths of the Bible Students originally associated with 
    the movement left the group. 20 

    In connection with the increased emphasis on witnessing, there 
    began to appear, in October of 1922, a monthly service sheet of 
    instructions called The Bulletin. Though these instructions had 
    been issued since 1917 to "pioneers," who devoted full time to 
    witnessing, they were now made available to all members of the 
    society to help them in their propagandizing activities. 27 

    2:1 Qualified to be Ministers, p. 316. 

    24 The name of this semi-monthly was changed in 1937 to Consolation; 
    in 1946 the name was changed to Awake, under which title it is still 
    published (Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, p. 89, note v). 

    2r > See the bibliography for Rutherford's other publications. 

    26 Op. tit., pp. 29, 41, 42. 

    27 In 1935 the name of this monthly was changed to Director; in 
    1936, to Informant; and in 1956, to Kingdom Ministry (Jehovah's Wit- 



    History 1 7 

    In 1931, at a convention held at Columbus, Ohio, the members 
    of the society adopted a resolution affirming that, from then on, 
    they were to be known as Jehovah's Witnesses, basing this new 
    name particularly on the words of Isaiah 43:10, "Ye are my 
    witnesses, saith Jehovah, and my servant whom I have 
    chosen. . . ." 28 

    In 1940 the society began its street distribution of the Watch- 
    tower and Consolation magazines, offering them to people on street 
    corners. This policy is still followed. Another witnessing method 
    which had been in vogue from 1934 — the playing of phonograph 
    records at the doors of homes — was abandoned in 1944, however, 
    in favor of personal presentations by the members. 29 

    During World War II the policy of neutrality which the society 
    had adopted in 1917 was reaffirmed, with the result that many 
    Jehovah's Witnesses were convicted and imprisoned for refusing 
    to serve in the armed forces. After 1940 most male witnesses 
    were able to establish their ministerial status before their local 
    draft boards so as to obtain 4-D exemptions from military service. 
    Not all were successful in obtaining such exemptions, however; 
    hence some 3,500 Witnesses were imprisoned during the war 
    years. 3 " It is significant to note that the number of Jehovah-Wit- 
    ness "ministers" doubled between the years 1939 and 1945, the 
    number given for the latter year being 141,606. 31 

    On January 8, 1942, Rutherford died. He had been president 
    of the society for twenty-five years. During his presidency the 
    society moved from a more or less democratic organization to a 
    "theocratic" one, 32 in which the directors of the various local con- 



    nesses in the Divine Purpose, p. 104 and p. 148, n. u). 

    28 Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, pp. 125-126. The entire 
    text of the resolution is there reproduced. 

    2y Qualified to be Ministers, p. 334. 

    3fl Ibid., pp. 327-31. The statement about "most male witnesses" 
    is found on p. 331. On pp. 223-24 of Jehovah's Witnesses in the 
    Divine Purpose, however, we are told that, during these war years, 
    only a few Jehovah's Witnesses were given ministerial exemption. 
    One wonders how these two apparently contradictory statements can 
    be reconciled. 

    31 Qualified to be Ministers, p. 332. "Ministers" are Jehovah's Witnesses 
    who are actively engaged in witnessing. Even those who do not 
    devote their full time to these religious activities are considered by the 
    group to be "ministers." 

    S2 "Theocratic" means God-ruled. Since Jehovah's Witnesses believe 
    that they are directly ruled by God, the adjective "theocratic" is applied 
    by them not only to their type of organization, but also to ali their 
    activities: they speak of "theocratic ministry," "theocratic warfare," and 
    so on. 



    1 8 Jehovah's Witnesses 

    gregations were no longer elected by local assemblies, but were 
    appointed by the governing body in Brooklyn. 33 

    Nathan Homer Knorr 

    On January 13, 1942, Nathan H. Knorr was elected to be the 
    society's third president. 34 He was born in 1905 in Bethlehem, 
    Pennsylvania. At the age of sixteen he had already resigned his 
    membership in the Reformed Church and had associated himself 
    with the Allentown, Pennsylvania, congregation of Jehovah's Wit- 
    nesses. At the age of eighteen he became a full-time preacher, and 
    joined the headquarters staff in Brooklyn. Soon he was made co- 
    ordinator of all printing activities in the society plant, becoming 
    general manager of the publishing office and plant in 1932. In 
    1934 he became one of the directors of the New York corporation, 
    and in 1940 he became vice-president of the Pennsylvania cor- 
    poration. 35 

    Knorr is not as well known as the previous two society presidents 
    were; few outsiders even know his name. One of his major con- 
    cerns while in office has been the improvement of the society's 
    training program. A major step in this new educational program 
    was the establishment, in 1943, of the Gilead Watchtower Bible 
    School in South Lansing, New York (near Ithaca). An im- 
    portant next step was the organization of "theocratic ministry 
    schools" in every Jehovah's Witness congregation. In order to 
    aid the congregations in their local training programs, three text- 
    books, containing information about Bible contents, witnessing 
    methods, and history, were published over a ten- year period: 
    Theocratic Aid to Kingdom Publishers (1945), Equipped for 
    Every Good Work (1946), and Qualified to be Ministers (1955). 

    In addition to the above titles, a new series of doctrinal books 
    is being published during Knorr's presidency. Unlike previous 
    Watchtower publications, however, these books are not the work 
    of a single author. Although it is surmised that Mr. Knorr is their 
    primary author, the books pass through several hands before pub- 
    lication, 30 and are issued anonymously. One of the first of these 

    33 Qualified to be Ministers, p. 320. 

    34 The following information about the history of the Jehovah's Witnesses 
    since 1942 is based chiefly on pp. 332-45 of Qualified to be Ministers, and 
    on pp. 196-295 of Jehovah's Witnesses in tlie Divine Purpose. 

    35 Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, p. 196. 

    36 This information was obtained from Mr. Ulysses V. Glass, Press 
    Secretary to Mr. Knorr, in an interview at Brooklyn Headquarters on 
    June 6, 1962. 



    History 19 

    books, which are now considered authoritative doctrinal guides 
    by the Witnesses, taking the place of previous publications by 
    Russell and Rutherford, was The Truth Shall Make You Free, 
    published in 1943. In 1946 came Let God Be True, a Jehovah- 
    Witness doctrinal summary, which was revised in 1952, and of 
    which, so it is claimed, more than 17,000,000 copies have been 
    printed, in 50 languages. Make Sure of All Things, which first 
    appeared in 1953 and was revised in 1957, is a compilation of 
    Scripture passages on seventy topics; Jehovah's Witnesses use this 
    volume as a handy Scripture reference book when making calls. 
    From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained, published in 1958, 
    represents a new format: the type is larger and easier to read than 
    that used in the other books, and there are many illustrations. By 
    means of these publications, which have been sold by the millions, 
    the society now spreads its teachings far and wide. 37 

    Another important project carried out during Knorr's presidency 
    has been the translation of the Bible into modern English. In 
    1950 the first of these translations appeared: The New World 
    Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures. The translation of 
    the Old Testament has been released in portions: Volume I was 
    published in 1953, Volume II in 1955, Volume III in 1957, Vol- 
    ume IV in 1958, and Volume V in 1960. In 1961 the entire 
    Bible in the New World Translation was published in one volume. 
    The translators make clear that this one-volume edition may be 
    considered a revised edition of the New World Translation, since 
    certain changes from previous editions have been made in it. 38 
    The names of the members of the New World Bible Translation 
    Committee which did the translating are not divulged; the members 
    of this committee have requested that they remain anonymous even 
    after their death. S!) This translation is by no means an objective 
    rendering of the Bible into English; it incorporates many features 
    which support Jehovah-Witness doctrines. 40 

    During Knorr's regime as president, there has been a tremendous 
    expansion of the work into foreign countries. Whereas in 1942 

    37 For other titles published since Knorr assumed the presidency, see 
    the bibliography. 

    ss New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, revised a.d. 1961 
    (Watchtower Society, 1961), p. 6. 

    39 Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, p. 258. 

    40 For scholarly and competent analyses of these translations, the 
    reader is referred to Bruce M. Metzger, op. cit., pp. 67, 74-80; and 
    to Walter E. Stuermann, "Jehovah's Witnesses," Interpretation, Vol. 
    V, No. 3 (July, 1956), pp. 323-45. See below, pp. 26-30. 



    20 ■ Jehovah's Witnesses 

    witnessing was carried on in only 54 countries, in 1971 work was 
    done in 207 countries. 41 

    Among the most publicized aspects of Jehovah-Witness activity 
    during the fifties were the Yankee Stadium conventions in New York 
    City, which were attended by Witnesses from all over the world. The 
    Yankee Stadium Assembly held in 1950 attracted a peak attendance 
    of 123, 707; 42 the 1953 assembly reported a top attendance of 
    1 65,829 ; 43 and the 1958 assembly, held simultaneously in Yankee 
    Stadium and the Polo Grounds, drew a record attendance on Sunday, 
    August 3, of 253,922 persons. 44 

    Statistics and Activities 

    Though the Watchtower Society keeps no membership roll, it does 
    keep a record of the preaching activities of Jehovah's Witnesses. 
    Since 1948, the January 1 issue of The Watchtower has contained 
    the so-called "Service Year Report" for the preceding year. From 
    the January 1, 1972, issue we glean the following information: in 
    1971 the average number of active Jehovah's Witnesses throughout 
    the world was 1,5 10, 245. ,5 This figure represents an increase over 
    the previous service year of 125, 000. 40 

    Jehovah's Witnesses do not recognize ordination in the sense in 
    which Christian churches do; every active Witness is called a "min- 
    ister." The closest analogy to an ordained minister among the Je- 
    hovah's Witnesses is a "pioneer publisher" — a person who devotes 
    his full time to witnessing and distributing literature. In 1971 the 
    average number of pioneer publishers throughout the world was 

    41 Qualified to be Ministers, p. 340; Watchtower, Jan. 1, 1972, p. 25. 

    42 Qualified to be Ministers, p. 342. 
    ■*» Ibid., p. 344. 

    44 Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, p. 291. 

    4r ' Watchtower, Jan. 1, 1972, p. 25. This is the figure given for "1971 Av. 
    Pubs." Pubs, stands for publishers, a common designation for active Witnesses. 
    Since it is said on p. 27 of this issue that these individuals "arranged to go from 
    house to house or to declare the good news of God's kingdom in some other 
    way every month during the past year," we may assume that this figure repre- 
    sents the total number of regularly active Witnesses for the year. Because the 
    Jehovah-Witness service year runs from Oct. 1 to Oct. 1, this figure reflects the 
    situation as of Sept. 30, 1971. The article from which the above figure was 
    taken goes on to say, "However, before the year ended, the number [of pub- 
    lishers] grew to 1,590,793" (p. 27). Apparently the number of adherents far 
    exceeds the number of active Witnesses, since the number who attended the 
    Memorial or Lord's Supper in 1971 is given as 3,453,542 (p. 25). 

    46 Ibid., p. 27. The report also states that 149,808 people were baptized 
    in 1971. 



    History 2 1 

    95,501. The total number of congregations listed for the year 1971 
    was 27, 154. 47 

    What is the geographical distribution of Jehovah's Witnesses? 
    The average number of active Witnesses in the United States for 
    1971 was 402, 893. 4S This figure represents twenty-seven percent of 
    the average number of active Witnesses in the world during that year. 
    In 1971, therefore, the relationship of active Witnesses in the United 
    States to those outside the United States was as follows: twenty-seven 
    percent in the United States, and seveny-three percent in foreign 
    countries. In other words, in 1971 approximately three out of every 
    four active Jehovah's Witnesses were to be found outside the United 
    States. 

    From the January 1, 1972, issue of The Watchtower we learn, 
    further, that the foreign country in which the most Jehovah's Wit- 
    nesses were found in 1971 is West Germany (87,976 active Wit- 
    nesses listed) . Next is Nigeria, with 75,372; then Brazil, with 66,460. 
    The British Isles come next with 62,813; then the Philippines, with 
    54,264; and then Zambia, with 52,369. 51,256 active Witnesses are 
    listed for Mexico, and 48,100 for Canada. Other countries where 
    the Witnesses claim to have had at least 5,000 active workers in 1971 
    include Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Chile, Colombia, 
    Congo (Kinshasa), Denmark, Finland, France, Ghana, Greece, 
    Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, 
    Puerto Rico, Rhodesia, Malawi, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Swit- 
    zerland, and Venezuela. 49 

    During the year 1971 Jehovah's Witnesses claim to have put in 
    291,952,375 hours of witnessing, and to have distributed 18,168,- 
    032 bound books and Bibles, 10,590,176 booklets, and 213,898,563 
    copies of The Watchtower and Awake. It is further stated that they 
    made 133,785 back calls and conducted 1,257,904 Bible studies in 
    1971. 50 

    As was noted previously, the two chief Jehovah-Witness periodi- 
    cals are The Watchtower and Awake, each of which appears bi- 

    47 Both of the above figures were obtained from the Jan. 1, 1972, Watch- 
    tower, p. 25. 

    ■"* Ibid., p. 22. It is interesting to note, however, that separate figures are 
    given for Alaska (823) and Hawaii (3,450). 

    4il A great many more countries are listed where a smaller number of active 
    workers are found. It must be remembered, of course, that I am simply repro- 
    ducing Jehovah-Witness figures here. We are not told how these figures are 
    arrived at, nor what criterion is used to determine whether a person is a pub- 
    lisher (active worker). 

    s <» Watchtower, Jan. I, 1972, pp. 25, 27. 



    22 Jehovah's Witnesses 

    weekly, one alternating with the other. In the July 15, 1972, issue of 
    The Watchtower it is claimed that 7,850,000 copies of this issue were 
    printed, in 74 languages. The July 8, 1972, issue of Awake reports 
    an average printing of 7,500,000 copies, in 27 languages. 

    Most of the literature of the society is printed and bound at its own 
    printing plant in Brooklyn, New York. Some idea of the scope of this 
    work may be gained from the fact that of one of the society's books, 
    The Truth that Leads to Eternal Life, published in 1968, 53 million 
    copies have been printed in 76 languages. 51 All those working at the 
    printing plant receive room and board, a modest yearly clothing 
    allowance, and fourteen dollars a month/' 2 This extremely low salary 
    is undoubtedly one of the biggest reasons why Jehovah's Witnesses 
    can still sell most of their bound books for as little as fifty cents 
    a copy. 

    Office workers at Bethel Headquarters (as the Brooklyn apart- 
    ment and office building is called) work for the same "salary" as 
    the employees of the printing plant. In addition, there are two 
    "Kingdom farms" — one near Ithaca, New York, and one about 
    fifty miles from New York City — which provide vegetables, fruit, 
    and dairy products for the "Bethel family." 

    For approximately thirty years the Watchtower Society owned 
    and operated Radio Station WBBR on Staten Island, New York. 
    In 1937, however, the society withdrew from the commercial use 
    of radio, and in 1957 Radio Station WBBR was sold. 53 

    As far as is known, the society operates no hospitals, sanatoriums, 
    clinics, or dispensaries. There are no Jehovah-Witness elementary 
    schools, high schools, or colleges. It has been noted, however, that in 
    1943 the Gilead Bible School was opened. In 1960 this school was 
    moved from its former location in South Lansing, New York, to 107 
    Columbia Heights in Brooklyn — across the street from Bethel 
    Headquarters. 54 This school has facilities for about 100 students; it 
    has a twenty-week curriculum, divided into four quarters of five 
    weeks each. sr> The students, many of whom come from foreign 
    countries, are trained in such subjects as Bible content, doctrines, 
    languages of the countries in which they will be working, and minis- 

    51 Letter from the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society dated July 4, 1 972. 

    52 Ibid. It should be remembered, however, that the people thus housed are 
    either single individuals or married couples without children. There are no 
    facilities at Bethel Headquarters in Brooklyn for married couples with children. 

    53 Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, pp. 120, 138, 283. 

    54 1961 Yearbook of Jehovah's Witnesses, p. 59. 

    55 Watchtower brochure entitled Watchtower Bible School of Gilead, p. 2. 



    History 23 

    terial activities."' There are other training schools in foreign coun- 
    tries, which give instruction on the Bible-school level for the various 
    types of Jehovah-Witness ministry/' 7 

    As far as the organization of the Watchtower Society is con- 
    cerned, mention has already been made of the three corporations 
    under which the society operates, and of its "theocratic" method 
    of appointing people to positions of leadership. Below the central 
    controlling powers are the so-called "regional servants," of which 
    there are six in the United States. These supervise the work done 
    in their areas, and report to the Board of Directors. Under these 
    are the "zone servants," which number 153 in the United States. 
    These must work with the congregations in their zones and must 
    conduct occasional "zone assemblies" at which the constituent 
    groups meet together. 58 The local groups, which are never larger 
    than two hundred, are called "companies" or "congregations," and 
    the person in charge of each congregation is called a "company 
    servant." 1 "' 9 The congregations meet in unpretentious buildings 
    called "Kingdom Halls." 60 

    Jehovah's Witnesses consider Christmas to be "a celebration 
    that is neither commanded nor mentioned in Scripture, but that 
    was borrowed from . . . pagan celebrations" 61 ; they oppose the 
    use of Christmas trees. 62 They are unalterably opposed to blood 
    transfusions, 63 and they refuse to salute the flag of any nation. 64 
    Though they do pay taxes and make social security payments, 
    they do not vote or hold political office. 65 In times of war Je- 
    hovah's Witnesses take a position of strict neutrality. They claim 
    that "the preaching activity of Jehovah's ministers entitles them to 
    claim exemption from performing military training and service in 
    the armed forces," adding that they have conscientious objections 
    to noncombatant as well as to combatant military service. 66 

    ■"'6 Ibid., pp. 2-3. 

    • r ' 7 Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, p. 293. 

    58 Ibid., pp. 189-90. 

    59 Ibid., p. 189. 

    90 For most of the above information I am indebted to Charles S 
    Braden, These Also Believe, pp. 365-66. 

    61 Awake, Dec. 8, 1961, p. 8. 

    62 Braden, These Also Believe, p. 379. 

    63 Make Sure of All Things, p. 47. 

    64 Let God Be True, 2nd ed. (1952), pp. 242-43. 

    65 Personal interview with Ulysses V. Glass, June 6, 1962. 

    66 Letter from Watchtower Headquarters, Jan. 21, 1963. 



    24 Jehovah's Witnesses 

    There have been a number of defections from the Jehovah- 
    Witness movement. One of the best known is the so-called Dawn 
    Bible Students' Association, which broke away from the parent 
    group after Russell's death; its headquarters are in East Ruther- 
    ford, New Jersey. Another prominent splinter group is the so- 
    called Laymen's Home Missionary Movement, which originated 
    in 1917. The first leader of this group was Paul S. L. Johnson; 
    its headquarters are in Philadelphia. Kurt Hutten is of the opinion 
    that approximately twenty groups have left the Jehovah's Wit- 
    nesses. 67 



    67 Die Glaubenswelt des Sektierers (Hamburg: Furche-Verlag, 1957), 
    p. 96. 



    Source of Authority 



    Norm for Interpreting Scripture 

    As we begin our examination of the doctrinal teachings of 
    Jehovah's Witnesses, we shall first of all take up the question of 
    their source of authority. The Watchtower Society has not issued 
    a set of statements of belief comparable to the "Fundamental Be- 
    liefs of Seventh-day Adventists," or the "Articles of Faith" of the 
    Mormons. To find the teachings of Jehovah's Witnesses on vari- 
    ous doctrinal points we must consult their publications. It will 
    be recalled that the anonymous books and booklets published since 
    1942 are now considered their authoritative doctrinal guides, re- 
    placing earlier publications authored by Russell and Rutherford. 

    When we approach these publications with the question, What 
    do Jehovah's Witnesses consider to be their ultimate source of 
      authority? the answer seems to be the same as that given by the 
      Protestant churches: namely, the Bible. "The Holy Scriptures of 
      the Bible are the standard by which to judge all religions." 89 
      Scripture, it is said, is the written revelation of the True God 70 ; the 
      Bible is therefore not a human product, but a book of which 
      God is the primary author and inspirer. 71 

      In Let God Be True, a widely circulated and well-known Jehovah- 
      Witness doctrinal book, it is unequivocally stated, "We shall let God 
      be found True by turning our readers to his imperishable written 
      Word." 7 - On another page it is said, 

      69 What Has Religion Done for Mankind? (Brooklyn: Watchtower 
      Bible and Tract Society, 1951), p. 32. 
      ''« Ibid., p. 26. 

      71 Ibid., pp. 29-31. 

      72 Rev. ed. (Brooklyn. 1952), p. 18. 

      25 



      26 Jehovah's Witnesses 

      To let God be found True means to let God have the say as 
      to what is the truth that sets men free. It means to accept his 
      Word, the Bible, as the truth. Hence, in this book, our appeal 
      is to the Bible for truth. Our obligation is to back up what 
      is said herein by quotations from the Bible for proof of truth- 
      fulness and reliability. 73 

      And another statement appears later in the volume: "The Word 
      of the Most High God is the dependable basis for faith." 74 From 
      both Old Testament and New Testament it is shown that the oral 
      traditions of men were not considered authoritative either by the 
      Bible writers or by Jesus Christ; hence the authors of Let God Be 
      True decisively reject such a second source of authority next to 
      the Bible. 75 

      We gratefully recognize that Jehovah's Witnesses thus clearly 
      state their dependence on Scripture as their final source of au- 
      thority. As we examine their theology, however, it will become 
      quite evident that this is by no means a fair and honest statement 
      of the case. Instead of listening to Scripture and subjecting them- 
      selves wholly to its teachings, as they claim to do, they actually 
      impose their own theological system upon Scripture and force 
      it to comply with their beliefs. 

      As evidence for this I advance, first, the fact that their New 
      World Translation of the Bible is by no means an objective render- 
      ing of the sacred text into modern English, but is a biased transla- 
      tion in which many of the peculiar teachings of the Watchtower 
      Society are smuggled into the text of the Bible itself. The Watch- 
      tower Society, for example, has intruded into the New World Trans- 
      lation its own peculiar teaching about the Holy Spirit. Jehovah's 
      Witnesses deny both the personality and the deity of the Holy 
      Spirit, defining the Holy Spirit as "the invisible active force of 
      Almighty God which moves his servants to do his will." 76 So 
      pervasively has this teaching been incorporated into the New 
      World Translation that no person reading this Bible without previ- 
      ous theological training would ever get the impression that the 
      Holy Spirit is a divine Person. 

      Let us observe how this is done. Though we are not told why 
      the New World Translation capitalizes words which have to do 
      with God, we may assume that they do so as a means of designat- 

      ■ra Ibid., p. 9. 
      7 * Ibid., p. 121. 
      7r > Ibid., pp. 11-18. 
      7 « Ibid., p. 108. 



      Source of A uthority 27 

      ing deity (for example, God, Lord Jehovah, Rock, King, Shep- 
      herd, and so on). As is well known, Jehovah's Witnesses deny 
      the full deity of Jesus Christ, maintaining that Christ is "a god" 
      but not "Jehovah God," that He is not equal to the Father, and 
      that He is not the Second Person of the Holy Trinity. It is, how- 
      ever, quite striking that the New World Translation capitalizes 
      various titles which designate Jesus Christ: for example, Word 
      (Jn. 1:1, 14), Son (Mt. 11:27), Saviour (Lk. 2:11), and Lord 
      (Jn. 20:28). The capitalization of these titles presumably indi- 
      cates that, though Christ is not recognized as equal to the 
      Father, He is nevertheless honored as the highest of all God's 
      creatures. 

      Against this background it is highly significant that the word 
      spirit, when used to designate the Holy Spirit, is never capitalized 
      in the New World Translation. In Matthew 28:19, for example, 
      we read, "Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the 
      nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son 
      and of the holy spirit." By this type of translation Jehovah's Wit- 
      nesses are affirming that they refuse to ascribe to the Holy Spirit 
      even the honor paid to Christ as the highest of all God's creatures. 
      This rendering thus not only denies the deity of the Holy Spirit, 
      but even denies His equality with Jesus Christ, who is considered 
      inferior to the Father. A comparable passage is II Corinthians 
      13:14, "The undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ and 
      the love of God and the sharing in the holy spirit be with all of 
      YOU." 77 To cite a few more examples, the words spirit or holy 
      spirit also occur in uncapitalized form in the following passages: 
      Isaiah 63:10 ("But they themselves rebelled and made his holy 
      spirit feel hurt"); John 14:26 ("But the helper, the holy spirit, 
      which the Father will send in my name, that one will teach YOU 
      all things and bring back to YOUR minds 'all the things I told 
      YOU"); Acts 8:29 ("So the spirit said to Philip: 'Approach and 
      join yourself to this chariot' "); and I Corinthians 12:3 (". . . no- 
      body can say: 'Jesus is Lord!' except by holy spirit"). 78 

      Despite their claim to be only listening to Scripture, Jehovah's 

      77 You is printed in capitals in the New World Translation to indicate 
      that the pronoun is in the plural number. 

      78 One cannot appeal to the Greek text to settle the question of 
      whether Holy Spirit ought to begin with capital letters, since in the 
      oldest manuscripts of the New Testament all the letters of every word 
      were capitals. The capitalization of words in a translation, therefore, 
      reflects the judgment of the translator or editor. 



      28 Jehovah's Witnesses 

      Witnesses are here reinterpreting the Bible in line with their 
      Unitarian ideas about God. Most emphatically does the Bible 
      teach the deity of the Holy Spirit. This is evident even from the 
      New World Translation of Acts 5:3-4. In this passage, after Luke 
      has recorded Ananias' sin, he reports Peter's words to him: 
      "Ananias, why has Satan emboldened you to play False to the 
      holy spirit. . . . You have played False, not to men, but to God." 79 
      The Holy Spirit, to whom Ananias has "played False," is here 
      unmistakably designated as being God. What clearer proof could 
      be asked for the fact that Jehovah's Witnesses pervert the Scriptures 
      to suit their purpose? 

      There is, however, another way in which Jehovah's Witnesses 
      pervert Biblical teaching about the Holy Spirit by means of their 
      translation of the Bible. As was noted, they also deny the per- 
      sonality of the Holy Spirit. This denial, too, they obtrude into 
      their supposedly objective rendering of God's Holy Word. Let 
      us note a few examples of this. John 14:26, in the New World 
      Translation, reads as follows: "But the helper, the holy spirit 
      which the Father will send in my name, that one will teach YOU 
      all things and bring back to YOUR minds all the things I told 
      YOU." The relative pronoun which conveys to the unsuspecting 
      reader the thought that the "holy spirit" here spoken of is not a 
      person but an impersonal power (since, in modern English, whom 
      is used to designate a person and which to designate a thing). 80 
      The Greek, to be sure, has ho, which is the neuter singular form 
      of the relative pronoun. The reason for this, however, is that the 
      antecedent of the relative is pneuma (spirit), which is a neuter 
      noun in Greek. That the Evangelist did not intend to say that 
      the helper whom the Father would send was a thing or an im- 
      personal force is evident from the form of the demonstrative pro- 
      noun, ekeinos (translated that one in the New World Translation). 

      79 Since there are some variations between the text of the New 
      World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures which was published 
      in 1950 and revised in 1951 and the later edition of the entire Bible, 
      it should be noted that all quotations from the New World Translation 
      appearing in this book, unless otherwise designated, are from the 
      1961 edition of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. 

      80 Because which as a relative pronoun could be used to designate 
      persons in 17th-century English, the King James Version of 1611 could 
      properly render the opening words of the Lord's Prayer, "Our Father 
      which art in heaven" (Mt. 6:9, Lk. 11:2). In modern English, however, 
      which may not be used to refer to persons; hence recent versions have sub- 
      stituted who for which in Mt. 6:9. 



      Source of A uthority 29 

      Though there is a neuter singular form of this pronoun, ekeino, it 
      is not the neuter form which is here used but the masculine singu- 
      lar form, ekeinos. The meaning is clear: that one, that person, 
      will teach you all things. The New World rendering, "which the 
      Father will send," is therefore a biased rendering which denies the 
      personality of the Holy Spirit. 81 

      Another example of this type of mistranslation is Romans 
      8:16, "The spirit itself bears witness with our spirit that we are 
      God's children." Still another example is found in Ephesians 
      4:30, "Also, do not be grieving God's holy spirit, with which 
      YOU have been sealed for a day of releasing by ransom." If 
      any Scripture passage teaches the personality of the Holy Spirit, 
      surely it is this one; for how can one grieve an impersonal force — 
      say, an electrical current? Yet the New World Translation 
      again uses which instead of whom. It should be clear by now 
      that these impersonal renderings of pronouns referring to the 
      Holy Spirit are not objective translations but perversions of the 
      Bible. 82 

      There are other ways in which the New World Translation dis- 
      torts the text of Scripture. More passages of this type will be 
      examined in detail in the Appendix. Enough evidence has been given 
      on the preceding pages, however, to establish the point that Jeho- 
      vah's Witnesses are not simply going back "to the Bible alone" when 

      si How would Jehovah's Witnesses explain the latter half of the verse, 
      "that one will teach you all things," in the light of their insistence 
      that the Holy Spirit is "the invisible active force of Almighty God"? 
      Can an impersonal force "teach all things"? 

      8a If Jehovah's Witnesses wish to justify their use of the pronoun 
      which with reference to the Holy Spirit on the ground of the fact 
      that pneuma is a neuter noun in Greek, we would remind them that 
      the New World Translation at other times uses a masculine or feminine 
      pronoun to refer to a neuter noun. For example, in Mt. 14:11 we 
      read, "And his head was brought on a platter and given to the maiden 
      (korasion), and she brought it to her mother." The Greek verb 
      translated "she brought" is eenegken, a third person singular form. 
      This form may be translated either as "he brought," "she brought," or 
      "it brought." The implied subject of the verb is korasion, a neuter 
      noun, meaning little girl or maiden. If a neuter noun always called 
      for a neuter pronoun, the translation should have read, "it brought it 
	to her mother." Here, however, the translators correctly interpreted the 
	neuter noun as standing for a person, and hence rendered the clause, 
	"and she brought it to her mother." We can only conclude, therefore, 
	that when the New World translators refer to the Holy Spirit as it 
	or which, their choice of pronouns is not based upon grammatical grounds 
	but upon their own preconceived conception of the impersonality of the 
	Holy Spirit. 



	30 Jehovah's Witnesses 

	they use their New World Translation, but are putting into people's 
	hands a biased rendering of the sacred text, by means of which their 
	heretical doctrines are subtly insinuated into the minds of unsuspect- 
	ing readers. 

	A second ground for the assertion made above (namely, that 
	Jehovah's Witnesses do not subject themselves to the claims of 
	Scripture but impose their own beliefs upon Scripture, thereby 
	forcing it to comply with their teachings) is that their method 
	of using Scripture is to find passages which seem to support their 
	views, and to ignore passages which fail to provide such support. 
	As an example of this technique, I present their attempt to dis- 
	prove the doctrine of the Trinity in Let God Be True. 

	After asserting that the doctrine of the Trinity originated not 
	with God but with Satan, the authors of this volume adduce four 
	Scripture passages which, so they say, are "the main scriptures 
	used to support the trinity doctrine"* 3 : I John 5:7, John 10:30, 
	I Timothy 3:16, and John 1:1. They then proceed to show that 
	I John 5:7 is probably spurious. S4 On this point they are correct — 
	this verse is not found in the oldest manuscripts of the Greek New 
	Testament and hence, though found in the King James Version, 
	it is omitted in all the modern versions, including both the ASV 
	and the RSV. sr ' It should be added at once, however, that 
	no reputable theologian from any evangelical denomination would 
	use this passage today as a proof -text for the Trinity! 

	The authors next proceed to interpret John 10:30 ("I and 
	the Father are one") as teaching merely that Jehovah and Christ 
	are regarded as "one in agreement, purpose and organization." 86 
	What the authors fail to mention, however, is that, according 
	to verse 31, the Jews took up stones to stone Jesus, giving as 
	their reason for this action, "For a good work we stone thee not, 
	but for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest 
	thyself God" (verse 33, ASV). A mere claim of agreement in 
	purpose with God would never have made the Jews cry "blas- 
	phemy!" The clear implication of this word, understood against 

	83 Let God Be True, p. 102. 

	m Ibid., p. 103. 

	85 In the King James Version I John 5:7 reads, "For there are three 
	that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy 
	Ghost: and these three are one." Though these later versions do have 
	a verse which is called verse 7, the words which comprise this 
	verse were part of verse 6 in the King James Version. 

	«« Ibid., p. 104. 



	Source of A uthority 3 1 

	the background of Jewish monotheism, is that the Jews under- 
	stood Jesus to be claiming full equality with God the Father. 

	The authors of Let God Be True next cite 1 Timothy 3:16. 
	Here the King James Version reads, "And without controversy 
	great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh 
	. . . ." The authors reject this reading in favor of the rendering 
	found in the American Standard Version: "He who was mani- 
	fested in the flesh," adding that Moffatt has also adopted this 
	reading. 87 They might have added that all the modern trans- 
	lations (including the RSV, the New English, the Berkeley Version, 
	and Phillips) have "he who" instead of "God," because the 
	manuscript evidence for the former reading is much stronger than 
	that for the latter. The above facts should make it clear that the 
	churches which confess the doctrine of the Trinity do not base 
	this tenet upon the older rendering of I Timothy 3:16, as Je- 
	hovah's Witnesses claim. 

	The last passage adduced as supporting the Trinity doctrine is 
	John 1:1. In agreement with the Emphatic Diaglott 6 * and the 
	New World Translation, the authors render the last part of this 
	verse, "and the Word was a god." In the Appendix it will be 
	demonstrated that this rendering of the Greek text is a mistransla- 
	tion. Suffice it to say here that the entire argumentation of this 
	paragraph is based on this mistranslation. 89 

	After discussing these four passages, the authors of Let God be 
	True go on: "In the four scriptures which the clergy erroneously 
	quote as supporting the trinity. . . ." i " ) This assertion, however, 
	is quite misleading, since no reputable "clergyman" or theologian 
	today who accepts the Trinity would use I John 5:7 in the King 
	James Version as a proof for that doctrine, and since no modern 
	version of the New Testament contains the reading of I Timothy 
	3:16 to which Jehovah's Witnesses object. 

	Confusion is worse confounded when the authors say, "There- 
	fore, if, as claimed, it [the doctrine of the Trinity] is the 'central 
	doctrine of the Christian religion,' it is passing strange that this 

	" Ibid., pp. 104-105. 

	ss An interlinear Greek Testament, originally published in 1864 by 
	Benjamin Wilson, a self-educated newspaper editor of Geneva, Illinois. 
	Because many of Mr. Wilson's theological conceptions were similar to 
	Watchtower teachings, the Watchtower Society now publishes the Em- 
	phatic Diaglott. 

	s» Let Cod Be True, p. 106. 

	»° Ibid., p. 107. 



	32 Jehovah's Witnesses 

	complicated, confusing doctrine received no attention by Christ 
	Jesus, by way of explanation or teaching." 91 The authors are 
	here guilty of deliberate misrepresentation, for they have failed 
	even so much as to mention the Great Commission of Matthew 
	28:19, where Jesus clearly teaches the Trinity: "Go ye therefore, 
	and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them into the 
	name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit" 
	(ASV). Nor has any mention been made by them in this 
	chapter of the Apostolic Benediction of II Corinthians 13:14, 
	the Trinitarian implications of which are quite obvious: "The 
	grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the 
	communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all" (ASV). Neither 
	has there been the slightest reference to I Peter 1 : 1 and 2, a passage 
	which gives equal honor to all three Persons of the Trinity: 
	"Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the elect who are so- 
	journers of the Dispersion . . . according to the foreknowledge of 
	God the Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience 
	and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. . ." (ASV). 

	Many more passages could be quoted to show that the Bible 
	definitely does teach the doctrine of the Trinity; passages of this 
	sort can easily be found in any standard evangelical textbook 
	of Christian doctrine. Enough of these passages have been cited 
	above, however, to demonstrate that, in "proving" their doctrines 
	from Scripture, the Witnesses deliberately select passages which 
	can be twisted so that they seem to favor their views, while dis- 
	regarding other texts which fail to support their views. Again we 
	see that, instead of listening to Scripture, Jehovah's Witnesses 
	impose their own ideas upon Scripture. 

	A third ground for the above-mentioned charge is the organi- 
	zation's insistence that their adherents may only understand the 
	Scriptures as these are interpreted by the leaders of the Watchtower 
	Society. Though ostensibly Watchtower leaders claim the Bible 
	alone as their sole source of authority, actually they say to their 
	adherents: You must understand the Bible as we tell you to, or 
	else leave the movement and thus run the risk of everlasting 
	  destruction! For proof of this accusation I advance the following 
	  evidence : 

	  ( 1 ) Charles Taze Russell affirmed that anyone who studied only 
	  the Bible, without the aid of his Studies in the Scriptures, would 
	  soon be in spiritual darkness. 11 - 

	  »i Ibid., p. 111. 92 See above, p. 13. 



	  Source of A uthority 3 3 

	  (2) During the 1890's, while Mrs. C. T. Russell was an associ- 
	  ate editor of the Watch Tower magazine, she tried to 

	  secure a stronger voice in directing what should appear in the 
	  Watch Tower. . . . When Mrs. Russell realized that no article 
	  of hers would be acceptable for publication unless it was con- 
	  sistent with the Scriptural views expressed in the Watch Tower, 
	  she became greatly disturbed and her growing resentment led 
	  her eventually to sever her relationship with the society and also 
	  with her husband. im 

	  Well might she be disturbed and resentful! For the editorial 
	  policy of the magazine was obviously this: Whatever you write 
	  must agree wholly with the interpretation of Scripture taught by 
	  the group in control; if it does not, your contribution will not 
	  be accepted. 

	  (3) In 1909 certain leaders of study classes were asking that 
	  Watch Tower publications should no longer be referred to in 
	  their meetings, but only the Bible. Russell himself replied to 
	  this suggestion in a Watch Tower article: 

	  This [the suggestion just made] sounded loyal to God's Word; 
	  but it was not so. It was merely the effort of those teachers to 
	  come between the people of God and the Divinely provided 
	  light upon God's Word. M 

	  A moment's reflection on the implications of these words will 
	  reveal that, according to Russell himself, the interpretations of 
	  the Bible furnished by Watch Tower writers are not at all in the 
	  category of helpful but fallible guides for the understanding of 
	  Scripture. On the contrary, these interpretations are alleged to 
	  be "the Divinely provided light upon God's Word." Surely at 
	  this point we are not far removed from the position of the 
	  Mormons, who affirm that God gave His people additional revela- 
	  tions through Joseph Smith which are determinative for the proper 
	  understanding of the Bible. 

	  (4) To meet the possible objection that what has been described 
	  above may have been True in Russell's day but is no longer True 
	  today, let us see what Let God Be True has to say about this ques- 
	  tion. After quoting Luke 12:37, the authors of this book go on to say 
	  that Jesus Christ is today the provider of spiritual food for his people 
	  and that he does so "through a visible instrument or agency on earth 

	  1,3 Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, p. 45. 

	  !M \y a tch Tower. 1909, p. 371; quoted in Jehovah's Witnesses in the 
	  Divine Purpose, p. 46 (the italics are Russell's). 



	  34 Jehovah's Witnesses 

	  used to publish it [this spiritual food] to his slaves." 95 Matthew 24: 
	  45-47 is then quoted in the New World Translation: "Who really is 
	  the faithful and discreet slave whom his master appointed over his 
	  domestics to give them their food at the proper time? Happy is that 
	  slave if his master on arriving finds him doing so. Truly I say to you, 
	  He will appoint him over all his belongings." Now follows this 
	  statement: 

	  This clearly shows that the Master would use one organiza- 
	  tion, and not a multitude of diverse and conflicting sects, to dis- 
	  tribute his message. The "faithful and discreet slave" is a com- 
	  pany following the example of their Leader. That "slave" is 
	  the remnant of Christ's spiritual brothers. God's prophet identi- 
	  fies these spiritual Israelites, saying: "Ye are my witnesses, 
	  saith Jehovah, and my servant whom I have chosen" (Isa. 43: 
	  10). 

	  From and after a.d. 1918 this "slave" class has proclaimed 
	  God's message to Christendom which still feeds on the religious 
	  traditions of men. The truth so proclaimed does a dividing 
	  work, as foretold, the ones accepting the truth being taken to 
	  the place of security, and the others abandoned. Those who 
	  have been favored to comprehend what is taking place, and 
	  who have taken their stand for Jehovah's Theocracy, have un- 
	  speakable joy now. The light of his truth is not confined to a 
	  small place, or one corner of the globe. Its proclamation is 
	  world-wide. In the thirty-three years from 1919 to 1952 in- 
	  clusive Jehovah's Witnesses distributed more than half a billion 
	  bound books and booklets, hundreds of millions of magazines, 
	  tracts and leaflets, and delivered hundreds of millions of oral 
	  testimonies, in over 90 languages. 98 

	  As we study this quotation, several points become clear: 
	  ( 1 ) The "faithful and discreet slave" in Jesus' parable is under- 
	  stood as designating an organization, namely, the "remnant of 
	  Christ's spiritual brothers." This means, in Jehovah-Witness 
	  terminology, the "anointed class," or 144,000, who play a leading 
	  role in directing the Watchtower Society and who hold all the 
	  more important offices." 7 

	  »"' Let God Be True, rev. ed. of 1952, p. 199. 

	  »« Ibid., p. 200. 

	  1,7 Ibid., p. 303. How these authors have come to apply the term 
	  "faithful and discreet slave" to an organization is one of the mysteries of 
	  Jehovah-Witness exegesis. In earlier days the expression was applied 
	  by this group to C. T. Russell. It was during Rutherford's time that 
	  the term came to be applied to the anointed class, this shift being, in 
	  fact, the occasion for a rather serious split within the movement 



	  Source of A uthority 3 5 

	  (2) The "domestics" over whom the "faithful and discreet 
	  slave" is placed are, apparently, the "other sheep," or "great 
	  crowd" — Jehovah's Witnesses who do not belong to the 
	  "anointed class," but who take an active part in the work. 98 

	  (3) The great task of the "anointed class" is that of providing 
	  spiritual food for the "other sheep." This implies that the "other 
	  sheep" must constantly look to the "anointed class" for the proper 
	  interpretation of the Bible and that they are not allowed to 
	  engage in any independent investigation of the Scriptures. 

	  (4) The "spiritual food" which the "anointed class" provides is 
	  "his [Christ's] message," "God's message" [in distinction from 
	  "the religious traditions of men"], "his [God's] truth." This 
	  truth is of decisive importance since all those who accept it will 
	  find spiritual security, whereas those who do not accept it will 
	  be abandoned by God. 

	  (5) It is this truth which is being disseminated throughout the 
	  world by means of the various publications of the Watchtower 
	  Society and by means of the oral testimonies of its members. 

	  It is now quite evident that, despite the claim 6f this movement 
	  to depend on the Bible alone, the real source of authority for 
	  Jehovah's Witnesses is the interpretation of the Bible handed down 
	  by the "anointed class" at Watchtower headquarters. To use their 
	  own language, the Witnesses insist that the Watchtower Society 
	  is "the instrument or channel being used by Jehovah to teach his 
	  people on earth." 99 All Christian groups outside their fold 
	  are thus alleged to be walking in darkness, no matter how diligent- 
	  ly they may study the Scriptures; only the Jehovah's Witnesses are 
	  said to be walking in the light, since their "anointed class" is God's 
	  channel of enlightenment for all people on earth. 100 

	  Instead of really listening to Scripture, therefore, Jehovah's 
	  Witnesses superimpose their own system of interpretation on the 
	  Bible, allowing it to say only what they want it to say. As an 



	  {Jehovah's Witness in the Divine Purpose, pp. 69ff.). Actually, it will 
	  be apparent to any careful reader that Jesus in this parable is not 
	  referring to any earthly organization at all, but to spiritual overseers 
	  over God's people (like pastors or teachers), considered as individuals, 
	  who are either faithful or unfaithful to their task. 

	  s8 This point is made clear in a discussion of this passage found in 
	  another Watchtower publication: Qualified to be Ministers, p. 353. See 
	  also New Heavens and a New Earth, 1953, p. 260. 

	  99 Qualified to be Ministers, p. 318. 

	  10,1 Yet, in Let God Be True, pp. 11-18. the authors solemnly claim 
	  to recognize no second source of authority next to the Bible! 



	  36 Jehovah's Witnesses 

	  example of this type of treatment of Scripture, I present their 
	  interpretation of Romans 13:1-7. From the earliest years of the 
	  Christian era this passage has been understood as applying to 
	  earthly governments and as teaching that lawfully appointed civil 
	  magistrates have been ordained by God. The reference to the 
	  sword in the ruler's hand (v. 4) and to the payment of tribute 
	  (v. 6) make it quite clear that the Apostle Paul was here dis- 
	  cussing the believer's attitude toward governmental authorities. 
	  One wonders how, in the light of this passage, Jehovah's Wit- 
	  nesses can justify their insistence that all governmental authorities 
	  are part of the devil's organization. 

	  Their reply is really quite simple: the church has never properly 
	  understood Romans 13! 

	  In 1929 the clear light broke forth. That year The Watch- 
	  tower published the Scriptural exposition of Romans chapter 13. 
	  It showed that Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, rather than world- 
	  ly rulers and governors, are "The Higher Powers". . . . m 

	  In another volume we are told that the submission which Romans 
	  13 tells us to render to Jehovah God and Jesus Christ, as our 
	  "Superior Authorities," includes "Theocratic submission" to those 
	  who have divine authority in the Theocratic organization — in 
	  other words, to the "anointed class." 10 - The authors of This 
	  Means Everlasting Life further inform us that the sword of verse 
	  4 is to be understood in a symbolic sense, as standing for God's 
	  power of executing judgment. 1(W Most inconsistently, however, 
	  the tribute of verse 6 is interpreted quite literally, as referring 
	  to the payment of taxes to the government!" 14 Why the sword is 
	  to be understood symbolically and the tribute must be interpreted 
	  literally, we are not told. Is further proof required to show that 
	  Jehovah's Witnesses do not arrive at their interpretations of 
	  Scripture by thorough, diligent, contextual study of the Word, 
	  but by imposing their preconceived ideas upon the Word? 

	  Kurt Hutten, one of the ablest students of the cults in our time, 
	  has aptly summed up the Witnesses' claim to be Jehovah's sole 
	  channel of truth in the following words: 

	  i<" The Truth Shall Make You Free, 1943, p. 312. See also Let God 
	  Be True, p. 248, and What Has Religion Done for Mankind?, 1951, p. 
	  292. Note the implication of the statement quoted above: previous 
	  to 1929 no one properly understood this passage! 

	  '"-' This Means Everlasting Life, 1950, p. 203. 

	  »>» Ibid., p. 199. 

	  1M Ibid., p. 200. 



	  Source of Authority 37 

	  The members of the [Jehovah-Witness] organization are obli- 
	  gated to unconditional obedience. This obligation includes 
	  the duty of accepting the word of God only in the interpreta- 
	  tion offered them by the Brooklyn publications. The Watch- 
	  tower Society has divine authority and hence also possesses 
	  a monopoly on the truth and on the proper proclamation of the 
	  Gospel. It is forbidden to nourish oneself from other sources 
	  or to think one's own thoughts. Those who do this disregard 
	  "the light which comes to them through God's channel with 
	  reference to His Word," and imply that "The Watchtower is not 
	  sufficient for our time." They thereby commit an offense 
	  which entails disastrous consequences, and are by Jehovah not 
	  reckoned as belonging to the "sheep" but to the "goats." For 
	  to despise the Theocratic organization is to despise Jesus 
	  Christ. 105 

	  Method of Interpreting Scripture 

	  It is, of course, conceivable that someone might say, Granted 
	  that the Jehovah's Witnesses recognize a superior source of author- 
	  ity in their own Watchtower publications, might it not be possible 
	  that the Watchtower publication staff does a fairly competent 
	  job of interpreting Scripture? By way of anticipating this type 
	  of question, I should like to describe briefly the methods of 
	  Scriptural interpretation used by this group. As we examine these 
	  methods, it will again become quite clear that Jehovah's Witnesses 
	  do not really subject themselves to the authority of God's Word, 
	    but simply manipulate the Scriptures so as to force them to 
	    agree with Watchtower teachings. 

	    The interpretation of Scripture found in Jehovah-Witness publi- 
	    cations is often characterized by absurd literalism. For example, 
	    Jehovah's Witnesses prohibit their members from receiving blood 

	    "'•"> Seher, Gruebler, Enthusiasten, 6th ed. (Stuttgart: Quell-Verlag, 1960), 
	    p. 105 [translation mine]. It is significant that this complete domination 
	    of Scripture interpretation by Watchtower leaders is precisely what 
	    William J. Schnell experienced during his thirty years with the movement. 
	    See, e.g., p. 43 of his Thirty Years a Watchtower Slave, where he ex- 
	    plains how the leaders of the society put themselves "into the sole position 
	    of giving the Organization's instructions on how to worship, what to 
	    worship with, and what to believe." Note also what is said by him on 
	    p. 107 about the indoctrination methods of the society whereby "their 
	    brain [that of the Jonadabs or 'other sheep'] became totally washed of 
	    any other ideas they might ever have loosely held about the Bible, 
	    themselves, or other people. Their own thoughts were thus replaced 
	    by a narrow sphere or circumscribed area of thought, or as the Watch 
	    Tower put it, a 'channel.' " 



	    38 Jehovah's Witnesses 

	    transfusions, justifying this prohibition by an appeal to Scripture 
	    passages which forbid the eating of blood. A sample of the 
	    type of passage involved is Leviticus 17:14, ". . . I said unto the 
	    children of Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of 
	    flesh. . . . 106 On the basis of Biblical passages of this sort they 
	    assert that blood transfusion is a "feeding upon blood," and is 
	    therefore "an unscriptural practice." 107 Certain that they have 
	    thus discerned Jehovah's will in this matter, Jehovah's Witnesses 
	    will deliberately let a loved one die rather than to permit a 
	    blood transfusion. 108 

	    Another example of absurd literalism is mentioned by Charles 
	    S. Braden: Jehovah's Witnesses forbid the use of Christmas trees 
	    on the basis of Jeremiah 10:3 and 4, ". . . The customs of the 
	    peoples are vanity; for one cutteth a tree out of the forest, the 
	    work of the hands of the workman with the axe. They deck it 
	    with silver and with gold. . . ." This must be, so they say, a 
	    Biblical reference to the Christmas tree; since verse 2 of this 
	    chapter says, "Learn not the way of the nations," it is obvious 
	    that the Christmas tree stands condemned! 109 



	    106 Other Old Testament passages adduced by them in this connection 
	    include Gen. 9:3-5; Lev. 7:26, 27; Lev. 17:10-12; Deut. 12:16. It is 
	    added that the prohibition of blood was also enjoined upon Christians 
	    in New Testament times, according to Acts 15:28, 29 (Make Sure of 
	    All Things, rev. ed., 1957, p. 47). 

	    ™7 ibid. 

	    108 It should be observed, however, that (l) the blood which was 
	    prohibited in the Levitical laws was not human blood but animal 
	    blood; (2) what was forbidden was the eating of this blood with the 
	    mouth — which is something quite different from receiving blood into 
	    one's veins as a medicinal measure; (3) the reason for this Old 
	    Testament prohibition is stated in Lev. 17:11, namely, that God had 
	    appointed the blood of animals as a means of making atonement, and 
	    that therefore such blood was not to be used as food (cf. C. F. Keil 
	    and F. Delitzsch, Commentary on the Pentateuch [Edinburgh: Clark, 
	    1891], II, 410); and (4) the reason why Gentile Christians were asked 
	    to abstain from blood, according to Acts 15:20 and 29, was that they 
	    might not give offense to Jewish Christians, who at this time still shrank 
	    with horror from the eating of blood (cf. F. F. Bruce, Commentary on 
	    Acts [Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 19551, and Lenski, ad loc). It is quite 
	    clear, therefore, that neither the Old Testament nor the New Testament 
	    passages adduced by Jehovah's Witnesses on this matter have anything to 
	    do with the current medical practice of blood transfusion. (For fuller 
	      treatment of this question, see Martin and Klann, op. cit., pp. 115-26). 

	      toi) These Also Believe, p. 379 (unfortunately. Dr. Braden does not 
	      mention the source of his information). It will be quite clear to even 
	      a casual reader of Jeremiah 10, however, that what is forbidden and 
	      ridiculed in vv. 3-5 is the making of wooden idols. 



	      Source of Authority 39 

	      These are but two examples of Jehovah-Witness literalism; 
	      many more could be given. It must not be inferred, however, 
	      that Jehovah's Witnesses always interpret the Bible literally. On 
	      the contrary, they are quite ready to spiritualize Scripture passages 
	      when such spiritualization fits into their preconceived ideas. For 
	      example, they spiritualize the sword in Romans 13:4, 110 and the 
	      twelve tribes in Revelation 7:4-8. 111 They are opposed to the 
	      literal interpretation of Christ's physical resurrection, 11 - of proph- 
	      ecies concerning the return of the Jews to their land, u:t and 
	      of prophecies regarding Christ's physical and visible return to 
	      earth. 114 

	      At other times the interpretation of Scripture found in Jehovah- 
	      Witness publications is characterized by absurd typology. So, 
	      for example, it is said that Noah in the Old Testament typified 
		Jesus Christ; that Noah's wife pictured the "bride of Christ," 
		that is, the "Christian congregation of 144,000 anointed members"; 
		that Noah's three sons and three daughters-in-law pictured the 
		"great crowd" (namely, the "other sheep," or larger class of 
		Jehovah- Witness adherents). The ark pictured the "new system 
		of things according to the new covenant mediated by Jesus Christ." 
		The flood symbolized the coming Battle of Armageddon. 115 

		Another example of absurd typology is the Jehovah-Witness 
		interpretation of the Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, 
		found in Luke 16:19-31. This parable, we are told, tells us 
		nothing about the state or condition of people after death, but 
		simply pictures two classes existing on earth today: 

		The rich man represents the ultraselfish class of the clergy of 
		Christendom, who are now afar off from God and dead to his 
		favor and service and tormented by the Kingdom truth pro- 
		claimed. Lazarus depicts the faithful remnant of the "body 

		110 See above, p. 36. 

		1,1 Let God Be True, p. 130. Jehovah's Witnesses take literally the 
		number 144,000 mentioned in these verses, but symbolically the distri- 
		bution of these 144,000 into the twelve tribes of Israel. 

		i" Ibid., p. 40. 

		n* Ibid., p. 217. 

		»• Ibid., pp. ]97fT. 

		lis New Heavens and a New Earth, pp. 310-11; cf. You May Survive 
		Armageddon into God's New World, 1955, p. 292; and The Truth Shall 
		Make You Free, 1943, pp. 323-27. To see Noah as a type of Christ, 
		and Noah's family as a type of the church is, of course, quite in 
		harmony with Biblical typology. But by what stretch of the imagination 
		are we justified in separating Noah's wife from Noah's children, as 
		standing for two different groups within the church? 



		40 Jehovah's Witnesses 

		of Christ." These, on being delivered from modern Babylon 
		since 1919, receive God's favor, pictured by the "bosom posi- 
		tion of Abraham," and are comforted through his Word. 110 

		William G. Schnell gives a further example of this kind of 
		typology. In 1931, he claims, the Watchtower Society inter- 
		preted the Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard, found in 
		Matthew 20:1-16, as follows: the twelve hours of the parable 
		stood for the twelve years which had elapsed since 1919 (when 
		the society had received a new lease on life after the discharge 
		of its leaders from prison). The shilling which every laborer re- 
		ceived, regardless of the length of time he had served, stood for 
		the new name which each member of the organization received 
		that year, whether he had been with the movement from the be- 
		ginning or had just joined: the name Jehovah's Witness.'^ 11 

		A third common characteristic of Jehovah-Witness Scripture 
		study is what might be called "knight-jump exegesis." Kurt 
		Hutten, who devotes several pages to an analysis of Watchtower 
		exegetical methods, 118 has coined this expression to describe the 
		way Witnesses jump from one part of the Bible to another, with 
		utter disregard of context, to "prove" their points. 11 " He goes on 
		to affirm that the Bible should be interpreted in an organic fashion, 
		in a manner which does full justice to the differences between Old 
		and New Testament, between poetic books and prophetic books, 
		between histories and epistles, and which takes into account 
		the fact that revelation is progressive — that it advances from 
		lesser to greater clarity. Since Jehovah's Witnesses cannot draw 
		their teachings from the Bible when so interpreted, however, they 
		must, Hutten continues, resort to "knight-jump" methods to arrive 
		at their conclusions. 1 '-' The Bible, for them, is like a flat surface 
		in which every text has equal value. 

		They [Jehovah's Witnesses] . . . can jump blithely from a 
		passage in the Pentateuch to a passage in the prophets or in the 
		book of Revelation. They can thus draw their lines in all di- 

		116 Let God Be True, p. 98. The reader is also referred to What 
		Has Religion Done for Mankind'}, 1951, pp. 246-56 and 302-12, for 
		a fuller discussion of this parable. 

		117 Thirty Years a Watchtower Slave, p. 97. 
		nH Seher, Gruehler, Enthusiasten, pp. 119-25. 

		in) "Der Roesselsprung," ibid., p. 120. A knight-jump in chess is a move 
		of three squares over the chessboard so that the piece passes over any 
		adjacent square whether occupied or not, and alights on a square of 
		different color from that which it started. 

		"o ibid., pp. 121-22. 



		Source of Authority 41 

		rections [kreuz unci quer\ through the Bible, gleefully combine 
		them in zigzag fashion, and put them together again in the 
		most fantastic way. 121 

		Hutten also compares their method of using Scripture to that of 
		children building various structures with building blocks, the 
		Bible being, for the Witnesses, the box which contains the blocks. 
		The only difference, so the author continues, is that, whereas 
		children do this type of thing in a playful spirit, being perfectly 
		ready to knock down their houses as soon as (or very soon after) 
		they have built them, Jehovah's Witnesses use this method in dead 
		earnest, believing that they are thus honoring the revelation of 
		God! 122 

		An outstanding example of this method of Bible interpretation 
		is their manner of arriving at the date 1914 as the year when 
		Christ's Kingdom was established, Jehovah's Witnesses claim 
		that "Christ the Messiah did not set up God's kingdom at his 
		first advent or at once after ascending to heaven." 12 "' How, then, 
		can we determine the time when the kingdom was established? 
		From Luke 21:24 it is learned that "Jerusalem will be trampled 
		on by the nations, until the appointed times of the nations are 
		fulfilled" (NWT). 124 The "appointed times of the nations," 
		it is said, "indicated a period in which there would be no repre- 
		sentative government of Jehovah on earth, such as the kingdom 
		of Israel was; but the Gentile nations would dominate the earth. " , - r ' 
		These times were running already in Jesus' day, since Jerusalem 
		was then in bondage to Rome. When, then, had these "times of 
		the nations" begun? In 607 B.C., when Israel, which was a 
		theocracy, lost her sovereignty and was carried away to Babylon.'-" 

		121 Ibid., p. 121 [translation mine]. 

		i 22 Ibid., pp. 121-22. 

		' 2 ^i The Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 241. 

		124 The abbreviation NWT will be used from now on for the 1961 
		edition of the New World Translation. 

		i 2f > Let God Be True, p. 250. 

		]2 ° Ibid., pp. 250-51. In Paradise Lost (this abbreviation will be used 
		from now on for From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained), 1958, p. 
		172, it is specifically stated: "The king of Babylon took Zedekiah off 
		'Jehovah's throne' in the year 607 b.c. and laid his city and territory 
		desolate. So that year God's earthly kingdom ended. And that year, 
		607 B.C., the 'appointed times of the nations' began." Unfortunately, 
		however, the facts do not bear out this assertion, which is pivotal for 
		Jehovah-Witness chronology. Old Testament scholars are virtually 
		unanimous in dating the capture of Zedekiah and the fall of Jerusalem, 
		not in 607 b.c, but in 587 or 586 B.C. (cf. J. D. Douglas, ed.. The 



		42 Jehovah's Witnesses 

		From Daniel 7:14, it is said, we learn that Christ was to 
		receive a kingdom which will never be destroyed. It is then naively 
		added, "When would Christ receive this never-to-be-destroyed 
		kingdom? At the end of the 'appointed times of the nations.' " 12? 

		When, then, will these "appointed times of the nations" end? 
		For the answer we switch to Daniel 4, which contains the account 
		of Nebuchadnezzar's dream of the tree and his subsequent period 
		of living like a beast of the field. This vision, we are told, was 
		a "prophetic vision . . . concerning the times of the nations and 
		the restoration of Jehovah's Theocracy." 128 Nebuchadnezzar is 
		told that after he shall have been reduced to the status of a beast, 
		"seven times" shall pass over him; following this his kingdom 
		shall be restored to him (Dan. 4:25-26). These "seven times," 
		it is said, depict symbolically the length of the "times of the 
		nations." 120 

		How, then, do we determine the length of these "seven times"? 
		In the case of Nebuchadnezzar they meant seven literal years. 
		Obviously this cannot be the prophetic meaning of the "seven 
		times," for then Christ would have ascended his throne already 
		in the Old Testament era. When we compare Revelation 12:6 
		with Revelation 12:14, however, we learn that "a time, and 
		times, and half a time" is equivalent to 1260 days. Obviously, 
		a time, and times, and half a time" are three and a half times. 
		But three and a half times constitute half of seven times; hence 
		seven times must equal twice 1260 days, or 2,520 days. 130 

		We are still not through with our calculation, however, since 
		2,520 literal days would only bring us seven years beyond the 
		beginning of the "appointed times of the nations." There must be 
		some deeper meaning hidden in this figure of 2,520 days. We 
		find this deeper meaning when we turn to Ezekiel 4:6. There 
		we read, in the King James Version, "I have appointed thee 
		every day for a year." 1 '" Thus we have our clue: 

		New Bible Dictionary, p. 1357; The Westminster Dictionary of the Bible, 
		p. 108; The Westminster Historical Atlas to the Bible, p. 15; and Merrill 
		F. Unger, Archaeology of the Old Testament, p. 284). 

		127 Paradise Lost, p. 173. 

		128 Let God Be True, p. 251. How the Watchtower editorial staff 
		can be so sure that this vision, which was given to Nebuchadnezzar 
		to reveal what God was about to do to him and to his kingdom, pertains 
		to the "times of the nations," we are not told. 

		J -'» Ibid., p. 251; cf. pp. 251-54. 

		i«" Ibid., p. 252. 

		331 Even the casual reader of this chapter will note that the expression 



		Source of A uthority 43 

		By applying this divine rule the 2,520 days means 2,520 
		years. Therefore, since God's typical kingdom with its capital 
		at Jerusalem ceased to exist in the autumn of 607 B.C., then, 
		by counting the appointed times from that date, the 2,520 years 
		extend to the autumn of a.d. 1914. u - 

		Thus, by a calculation which involves a conglomeration of 
		figures derived with great ingenuity from assorted passages taken 
		from Luke, Daniel, Revelation, and Ezekiel, we have arrived at 
		the year 1914. Here is "knight-jump exegesis" with a vengeance! 
		Yet Jehovah's Witnesses assure us that by this type of procedure 
		they are listening to the Word of God instead of to the traditions 
		of men! 

		A fourth characteristic of Jehovah-Witness exegesis is what we 
		might call the "rear-view method" of interpreting prophecy. Hutten 
		indicates that much of their prophetic interpretation rests upon 
		a rather primitive kind of trick: they first pounce on certain 
		happenings in the recent past, then find some Biblical texts which 
		can somehow be made to fit these events, after which they trium- 
		phantly point to the events in question as "fulfilled prophecies." 1 :i:l 

		As an example of this technique, 1 suggest the Jehovah-Witness 
		interpretation of Revelation 11:11-13. This passage describes 
		the two witnesses who, after having been killed, were revived 
		again. The Witnesses say this prophecy was fulfilled in 1919, 
		when Judge Rutherford and other leaders of the movement were 
		released from prison and thus enabled to resume their witnessing 
		activities ! ,s4 

		Another example of this type of "rear-view" exegesis is the 
		Jehovah- Witness explanation of Revelation 17:3-6. This passage 
		depicts a woman sitting on a scarlet-colored beast, on whose 
		forehead has been written the name, "Babylon the Great, the 
		mother of the harlots and of the disgusting things of the earth" 
		(NWT). Jehovah's Witnesses interpret this woman as standing 
		for "the visible organization of the religious heads of heathendom 



		  quoted above designates the meaning of the symbolic action the prophet 
		  is commanded to engage in: each day the prophet lies on his side stands 
		  for a year in the history of the house of Israel or the house of Judah. 
		    To draw from this passage a rule applicable to a figure derived from 
		    the book of Revelation is, to say the least, dubious exegesis! 

		    >«-' Lei God Be True, p. 252. 

		    1:i:! Seller, Grtiebler, Enthusiasten, p. 123. 

		    ,:u You May Survive Armageddon [this abbreviation will be used from 
		    now on for You May Survive Armageddon into God's New World], 
		    pp. 116-120. See also New Heavens and a New Earth, pp. 255-56. 



		    44 Jehovah's Witnesses 

		    and Christendom." 1 *"' The beast the woman rides, it is further 
		    said, is 

		    this peace beast, formerly known as the League of Nations but 
		    now since its reappearance in 1945 the United Nations. Its 
		    having sixty member nations in 1951 was well symbolized in 
		    the peace beast's having seven heads and ten horns. 186 

		    In Let God Be True we are given a further reason why this identi- 
		    fication of the beast with the present-day United Nations organi- 
		    zation must be True: "As for that many-membered beastly associa- 
		    tion of nations, the 'wild beast that you saw was, but is not [during 
		    World War II], and yet is destined to ascend out of the abyss 
		    [as the United Nations]'." 137 

		    Having briefly examined some typical methods of Scripture 
		    interpretation used by Jehovah's Witnesses, we conclude that they 
		    do not really subject themselves to the authority of the Bible 
		      alone, apart from human traditions, as they claim to do. Rather, 
		      as we now see more clearly, their very method of interpreting 
		      the Scriptures makes it impossible for them really to listen to 
		      God's Word. Given the methods described above, one can draw 
		      from the Bible virtually any doctrine his imagination can concoct. 
		      These doctrines may be interesting, novel, and appealing — but 
		      they suffer from one fatal defect: they do not rest upon the 
		      authority of God's Word, but upon the fabrications of man's 
		      mind! 

		      T« r ' What Has Religion Done for Mankind?, 1951. p. 328. Note 
		      the utterly arbitrary way in which all heathen religions and all forms of 
		      Christianity are lumped together as constituting "the great whore" of 
		      Rev. 17. For Jehovah's Witnesses, therefore, there is no religiously 
		      significant difference between, say, a Nigerian animist and a devout 
		      Lutheran Christian. 

		      ,:i8 Ibid., pp. 328-29. How 60 member nations are pictured by 7 
		      heads and 10 horns we are not told. 

		      187 P. 258. The words between single quotation marks have been quoted 
		      from Revelation 17:8 in the 1951 ed. of the NWT, comments between 
		      brackets having been inserted by the authors of Let God Be True. For 
		      Jehovah's Witnesses, therefore, the fact that the beast is described as one 
		      that "was, is not, and is destined to ascend out of the abyss" proves 
		      conclusively that this Scripture passage predicted the rise of the League 
		      of Nations, its disappearance, and the subsequent rise of the United 
		      Nations! 



		      III. Doctrines 



		      Doctrine of God 
		      the being of god 
		      The Trinity. As is well known, Jehovah's Witnesses reject the 
		      doctrine of the Trinity. They claim, in fact, that this doctrine 
		      originated with the ancient Babylonians at about 2200 b.c. 1ss 
		      It is said that the Babylonians had a kind of divine triad: Cush, 
		      the father; Semiramis, the mother (Cush's wife); and Nimrod, the 
		      first ruler of Babylon, who was the son of Semiramis but later 
		      became her husband. Since all three of these individuals were 
		      deified by the Babylonians, this is where the idea of the trinity 
		      originated.'^' Later the Hindus, it is claimed, borrowed this idea 
		      of a divine triad from the Babylonians. In the Hindu religion this 
		      trinity assumed the following form: Brahma the Creator, Vishnu 
		      the Preserver, and Siva the Destroyer. These three together com- 
		      posed the one god Brahm. 14 " There was even a kind of trinity in 
		      Egypt: the goddess Isis, her sister Nephthys, and Osiris, the son of 
		      Nephthys, who was adopted by Isis as her son, but who also be- 
		      came Isis's husband. 141 We conclude, it is said, that the doctrine 
		      of the trinity had its origin in the demon-religions of ancient Baby- 

		      is» Make Sure of AH Things, p. 386. 

		      vv -> Religion for Mankind [this abbreviation will be used from now 
		      on for What Has Religion Done for Mankind?], pp. 92-95. On p. 95 
		      it is added that, since Nimrod had married his mother, one could say 
		      that he was his own father and his own son. Thus, it is said, the way 
		      was prepared for the doctrine of the trinity. 

		      i-t" Ibid., p. 193. 

		      " 1 Ibid., p. 109. 

		      45 



		      46 Jehovah's Witnesses 

		      Ion, India, and Egypt. "The obvious conclusion is, therefore, that 
		      Satan is the originator of the Trinity doctrine. " ,4 - 

		      According to Jehovah's Witnesses, the only True God, in one 
		      person, is Jehovah. Before He began to create, Jehovah was all 
		      alone in universal space. u:i It is recognized that the name Elohim 
		      is also applied to God in the Old Testament; it is, in fact, specif- 
		      ically affirmed that the plural form of Elohim does not denote 
		      the persons of the Trinity but is a plural of majesty, which describes 
		      a single person. 144 The Witnesses claim, however, that Jehovah, 
		      which they prefer to use, is God's True and exclusive name. While 
		      granting that perhaps this name should be pronounced Yahweh, 
		      they favor the form Jehovah because this is the most familiar and 
		      popular way of rendering the divine name. 145 

		      This divine name is therefore consistently rendered Jehovah in 
		      the Old Testament section of the New World Translation — a 
		      practice to which no exception can be taken, particularly since 
		      this was also done by the translators of the American Standard 
		      Version. Without any Scriptural warrant whatsoever, however, 
		      Jehovah's Witnesses have also introduced the name Jehovah 237 
		      times into the text of the New World Translation of the New 
		      Testament. 140 

		      "- Let God Be True, p. 101. 

		      ]4:i Ibid., p. 25. 

		      144 New Heavens and a New Earth, pp. 35-36. 

		      143 Let God Be True, p. 23; New World Translation of the Christian 
		      Greek Scriptures, 1951 ed., pp. 10, 25. 

		      146 New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures, p. 24. 
		      On what basis do they justify this practice? Their argument runs as 
		      follows: A papyrus manuscript of the second half of Deuteronomy 
		      in the LXX translation has recently been found, which has been dated 
		      from the second or first century B.C. This manuscript, called Papyrus 
		      Fouad 266, consistently has the tetragrarnmaton (JHVH, the Hebrew 
		      form rendered Jehovah in the ASV) in Aramaic characters for the divine 
		      name instead of the common renderings of the name: Kurios (Lord) or 
		      Theos (God). From this fact it is concluded that the original manu- 
		      scripts of the LXX, which were written in the 3rd and 2nd centuries B.C., 
		      also must have had the divine name in its tetragrarnmaton form, instead 
		      of in the forms Kurios or Theos, and it is implied that later copyists 
		      of the LXX deliberately substituted Kurios or Theos for the tetragrarn- 
		      maton (pp. 11-12). This being so, Christ and his disciples must have 
		      had copies of the LXX which had the divine name in its tetragrarn- 
		      maton form (p. 12). The writers of the New Testament, therefore, 
		      must have used the tetragrarnmaton for the divine name in their 
		      Greek writings, which would include the books of the New Testament 
		      (p. 18). Hence it is obvious that the text of the New Testament has 
		      been tampered with and that copyists have eliminated the tetragramma- 



		      Doctrines Al 

		      Jehovah's Witnesses deny the full deity of Jesus Christ, and 
		      his complete equality with Jehovah. He may be called a god, 
		      but not Jehovah God; he is a mighty one but not almighty as 
		      Jehovah God is. 147 He was created by Jehovah as the first son 
		      brought forth by Him; "hence he is called 'the only begotten Son' 
		      of God, for God had no partner in bringing forth his first-begotten 
		      Son."' 48 Since Christ was the first creature of Jehovah, he had 
		      a beginning. 149 It is obvious therefore, that Christ is not the 
		      second person of the Trinity. 150 

		      As has already been stated, the Holy Spirit is, for Jehovah's 
		      Witnesses, "the invisible active force of Almighty God which moves 
		      his servants to do his will." 151 At another place it is added: "It 
		      [the Holy Spirit] is the impersonal, invisible active force that 
		      finds its source and reservoir in Jehovah God and that he uses to ac- 
		      complish his will even at great distances, over light years of 
		      space." 152 The Holy Spirit is therefore neither God nor a person; 

		      ton from these manuscripts, substituting for it either Kurios or Theos 
		      (p. 18). Therefore, Jehovah's Witnesses say, we are justified in re- 
		      placing Kurios or Theos with the tetragrammaton (in the form Jehovah) 
		      in 237 instances (p. 19). 

		      In reply, the following may be said: (1) The fact that an early 
		      fragment of the LXX used the tetragrammaton exclusively does not 
		      prove that the entire LXX text originally followed this practice. This 
		      fragment may simply have represented one type of LXX text. If the 
		      tetragrammaton were used exclusively in the original manuscripts, how 
		      do we account for its complete disappearance from the 4th and 5th 
			century uncials of the LXX? (2) Even if the LXX did originally use the 
			tetragrammaton, this fact would give us no warrant for tampering with 
			the text of the New Testament which has Kurios or Theos for God but 
			never JHVH, not even where JHVH did occur in Old Testament passages 
			quoted (see Moulton and Geden's Concordance to the Greek Testament 
			under Kurios). To assume that the text of the New Testament has 
			been corrupted in 237 places without one shred of textual evidence is 
			to engage in a most dangerous kind of speculation! (3) The fact, alluded 
			to by them, that some translations of the New Testament into Hebrew 
			use the tetragrammaton to designate God proves precisely nothing! For 
			how otherwise would Hebrew translators render a Greek word which 
			was originally JHVH? 

			n" Let God Be True, pp. 32. 33. 

			»» Ibid., p. 32. 

			i*» Ibid., p. 33. 

			150 Further details about their view of Christ will be given under 
			the Doctrine of Christ. 

			151 Let God Be True, p. 108. 

			■ 52 Let Your Name Be Sanctified, 1961, p. 269. Note the word reservoir, 
			which suggests that the Holy Spirit is a kind of substance which is stored 
			in God. 



			48 Jehovah's Witnesses 

			he is merely an impersonal force — we have previously noted 
			how Jehovah's Witnesses have insinuated this conception of the 
			Holy Spirit into their New World Translation.^™ 

			Strictly speaking, therefore, Jehovah's Witnesses are Unitarians. 
			For them, God exists only in one Person — the Person of Jehovah. 
			Jesus Christ, though a person, is not a divine Person; the Holy 
			Spirit is neither a person nor a divine Person. 

			The Attributes of God. The Witnesses usually speak of four 
			attributes of Jehovah: justice, power, love, and wisdom. No 
			attempt is made by them to distinguish between incommunicable 
			and communicable attributes, it being specifically said that the 
			same four attributes or qualities which are found in God are also 
			found in man. 15 * 

			Are any of these attributes given prominence above others? 
			It has frequently been said that Jehovah's Witnesses minimize 
			the love of God, and tend to exalt the power of God as His 
			outstanding attribute. Charles Braden, for example, makes this 
			assertion 153 ; John H. Gerstner implies the same. 1 '"' Kurt Hutten 
			is of the opinion that the vindication of Jehovah is, for Jehovah's 
			Witnesses, the theme of world history — a vindication which will 
			finally reveal itself in a spectacular kind of public triumph 
			over Satan and his hosts. What the Witnesses fail to see, he 
			continues, is that according to Scripture God glorifies Himself 
			especially through His love, revealed in the sending of His Son 
			into the world to seek and to save that which was lost. ir>7 

			What shall we say about this? To be fair to the Witnesses at this 
			point, we must grant that they do stress the importance of the 
			love of God. They make love, as we have seen, one of the main 
			attributes of God. Further, in the booklet entitled God's Way is 
			Love, published in 1952, great emphasis is laid on this attribute 
			of God. We are here told, for example, that God's love is opposed 
			to both purgatorial torment after death and eternal torment in 
			hell (p. 12), that God showed his love in creating the universe 
			(pp. 14-17), and in putting man into an earthly paradise of 
			pleasure (p. 18). After Adam and Eve had sinned, God showed 

			153 see above, pp. 27-29. 

			154 Your Will Be Done [this abbreviation will be used from now on 
			for Your Will Be Done on Earth, 1958], p. 21. On p. 191 of Make 
			  Sure of All Things, however, the omnipresence of Jehovah is denied. 

			  liiii These Also Believe, p. 371. 

			  ir>« Theology of the Major Sects (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1960), p. 36. 

			  1ST Seher, Gruebler, Enthusiasten, pp. 129-30. 



			  Doctrines 49 

			  his love for mankind by giving man the promise of Genesis 
			  3:15 (p. 20). The Bible, we are told, is a gift of God's love 
			  (p. 22). The reign of Christ, which began in 1914, is an ex- 
			  pression of God's love for mankind (p. 27). Even the Battle of 
			  Armageddon is an expression of God's love for man since it will 
			  be a blessing for man to have the wicked destroyed (p. 28). 
			  God's provision of redemption for mankind is said to be a 
			  manifestation of his love (p. 31). In fact, "everything God has 
			  done and will do in the future is prompted by love" (p. 13). 
			  It is therefore not correct to say that Jehovah's Witnesses lay 
			  no stress on the love of God. It is True, however, that for them 
			  the vindication of Jehovah or of Jehovah's name is the primary 
			  purpose of world history: 

			  . . . Today the great issue before all heaven and earth is, Who 
			  is supreme? Who in fact and in right exercises the sovereignty 
			  over all the universe? Jehovah's primary purpose is to settle this 
			  issue. To do so means the vindication of his universal sover- 
			  eignty or domination. 158 

			  It is further said that the great means whereby Jehovah will vindi- 
			  cate Himself will be the war of Armageddon and that the vindi- 
			  cation of His reproached name is more important than the salvation 
			  of men. 159 

			  It should further be observed that the vindication of Jehovah 
			  is also the primary purpose for which Jesus came to earth: "After 
			  this announcement of the Kingdom Jesus went to John, showing 
			  the primary purpose for which he came to earth, namely, to bear 
			  witness to God's kingdom which will vindicate the sovereignty and 
			  holy name of Jehovah God."' 01 ' It is granted that Jesus also 
			  came to earth to redeem man, but this is said to have been a 
			  secondary purpose: 

			  Thus John showed the secondary purpose for which the Son 
			  of God came to earth, namely, to die as a holy sacrifice to 
			  Jehovah God in order to cancel the sins of believing men and to 
			  free them from death's condemnation, that they might gain 

			  is* Let God Be True, pp. 27-28. See also p. 163: ". . . Vindication of 
			  Jehovah's name and sovereignty is the foremost doctrine of the Bible. . . ." 

			  159 Ibid., p. 29. Note that, in the light of this statement, the primary 
			  purpose of Armageddon is not to reveal God's love to man but to 
			  vindicate Jehovah over against his enemies. Cf. on this point also You 
			  May Survive Armageddon, pp. 25-26, where it is specifically said that 
			  Armageddon will be a manifestation of God's justice rather than of His 
			  love. 

			  i«" Let God Be True, p. 37. 



			  50 Jehovah's Witnesses 

			  eternal life in the righteous new world which God has promised 
			  to create. ,B1 

			  I conclude, therefore, that, though Jehovah's Witnesses do 
			  stress the love of God in various ways, in the totality of their 
			  theology Jehovah's love is subordinated to His power and His 
			  justice. For this judgment I advance the following reasons: 
			  (1) It is clearly stated by them that the vindication of Jehovah 
			  is the primary purpose of world history and of the coming of 
			  Christ. This vindication of Jehovah means that He will prove 
			  Himself superior to His enemies, both in regard to the Tightness 
			  of His cause and the greatness of His power. This vindication 
			  will be dramatized especially by the great climax of world history, 
			  the Battle of Armageddon, at which He will overwhelmingly 
			  demolish His foes. (2) Even in God's plan of redemption, which 
			  is secondary to His main purpose, it is not so much the love of 
			  God for unworthy sinners which is magnified as His just recogni- 
			  tion of the worthiness of His True followers. As will become 
			  evident when we discuss Jehovah-Witness soteriology, Jehovah's 
			  True people, whether belonging to the anointed class or to the 
			  other sheep, are chosen by Him because of their worthiness in 
			  believing on Him and in dedicating their lives to Him. During 
			  the millennium the millions who will be raised from the dead 
			  will be given a new opportunity to show their faithfulness and 
			  obedience to Jehovah, on the basis of which their final destiny 
			  will be determined. Even the way of salvation, therefore, in 
			  Jehovah-Witness theology, serves primarily to vindicate Jehovah's 
			  justice rather than to reveal His love. 

			  THE WORKS OF GOD 

			  Decrees. One of the first doctrines Russell doubted was pre- 
			  destination. It will be of interest, therefore, to see what present- 
			  day Witnesses teach about this doctrine. 

			  Only with respect to Jesus Christ do Jehovah's Witnesses teach 
			  the predestination of an individual: "Only in the case of the 
			  chief member of the new creation did God foreordain and fore- 
			  know the individual, his only-begotten Son." 162 Having used 
			  Christ in forming the heavens and the earth, Jehovah then used 

			  ]fil Ibid., p. 38. In the light of these quotations it would seem that 
			  God's provision of redemption for mankind as a manifestation of his 
			  love is only a secondary purpose for Christ's coming to earth. 

			  302 New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 159. 



			  Doctrines 5 1 

			  him also in forming His new creation: namely, the people that 
			  were to constitute His new nation. Of this people Jesus Christ 
			  was chosen to be the head. 163 

			  What about the members of this new nation? 

			  In the case of the others [those other than Christ] he [Jehovah] 
			  did not choose to predestinate the individuals, although he did 
			  foreordain the number of them and their nationality. But he 
			  left it open to those favored with the opportunity in his fore- 
			  ordained time to prove themselves worthy of being incorporated 
			  finally into the new creation. 164 

			  God foreordained the exact number of this new nation: 144,000. 
			  This number has been derived from Revelation 7:4-8, and 14:1 
			  and 3; Jehovah's Witnesses take this number literally, but they 
			  take the fact that these 144,000, according to Revelation 7:5-8, 
			  were selected out of the twelve tribes of Israel, figuratively! 165 
			  It was therefore foreordained by Jehovah that this group would 
			  be no larger than 144,000 and that its members would be 
			  drawn from various nations. 186 

			  It is clear that this is not predestination in the Reformed sense 
			  or even in the Arminian sense. God has simply determined the 
			  number of people that will belong to this class, but He has not 
			  chosen them as individuals. The following passage adds the 
			  thought that God has simply determined beforehand what should 
			  be the requirements for belonging to this class: 

			  God has foreknowledge of the elect [another name for the 
			  144,000]; not meaning that he chose to foreknow the individ- 
			  uals, but that he purposed or predestinated that there should 
			  be such an elect company. . . . He did not have to concern him- 
			  self with the individuals and their names and personal identi- 
			  ties. He simply determined beforehand or predestinated what 
			  should be the requirements for membership in this class and 
			  what standards they had to meet and what qualities they had to 
			  display. 167 

			  ]83 Ibid., p. 160. The "new nation" means the anointed class or 
			  144,000. From time to time in this exposition, the distinction between 
			  "anointed class" and "other sheep" will be referred to, since one cannot 
			  understand any phase of Jehovah-Witness theology apart from this dis- 
			  tinction. A more complete description of these two groups will be 
			  given under the Doctrine of the Church. 

			  is* Ibid., p. 159. 

			  i«5 Let God Be True, p. 130. 

			  1«« New Heavens and a New Earth, pp. 168-69. 

			  10 7 The Kingdom Is at Hand, 1944. pp. 291-92. 



			  52 Jehovah's Witnesses 

			  How about the "other sheep"? Has their number also been 
			  determined beforehand by God? No. Since Revelation 7:9 
			  and 10 tells us about a "great crowd which no man was able to 
			  number," distinct from the 144,000 mentioned in the earlier verses 
			  of the chapter, Jehovah's Witnesses conclude that the other 
			  sheep are not limited in number. "Anyone may become one of 
			  this great crowd of sheeplike people who will gain everlasting 
			  life on a paradise earth. " ,G8 How? By hearing the voice of the 
			  Right Shepherd and coming into the New World Society. iea 
			  This means, of course, subjecting themselves to the Society's 
			  requirements for other sheep. 

			  Jehovah's Witnesses thus deny that God has chosen from eternity 
			  those who are to be saved, whether they be members of the 
			  anointed class or of the other sheep. By thus rejecting divine pre- 
			  destination they impugn the sovereignty of God. At this point 
			  it would seem that the "vindication of Jehovah's sovereignty" 
			  is not coming off very well. 

			  Creation. Jehovah's Witnesses affirm that God created all 
			  that exists and therefore vigorously oppose all evolutionary 
			  theories. 170 God's various creations, however, took place at 
			  various points in time. 

			  The first creature Jehovah made was Jesus Christ. Previous 
			  to this time Jehovah had been sonless; now He for the first time 
			  became a father. Jehovah did not form Christ out of pre-existent 
			  matter or with the help of a "female principle"; He formed Christ 
			  out of nothing. Christ was therefore the only direct Son of 
			  God; hence he may be called the only-begotten Son. 171 

			  With the co-operation of this Son, Jehovah afterwards brought 
			  forth all His other sons. 172 In other words, Jehovah used His 
			  Son as a working partner or co-worker through whom all other 
			  things, including angels and men, were brought into existence. 17 ' 

			  Next God created a realm of spirits. "The creating of the 
			  spirit realm was long before the creating of the material universe 

			  188 Paradise Lost, p. 195. 

			  io» Ibid., p. 196. 

			  i™ Let God Be True, Chap. 7. 

			  171 New Heavens and a New Earth, pp. 24-25. Note that the Witnesses 
			  do not recognize the kind of distinction suggested in the Nicene Creed: 
			    "begotten, not made"; for they maintain that Christ was both created by 
			    the Father and begotten by the Father. 

			    I" Jbid., p. 25. 

			    "3 ibid., pp. 62-63; Let God Be True, p. 33. Cf. The Truth Shall Make 
			    You Free, p. 48. 



			    Doctrines 53 

			    with its billions of independent galaxies like our own Milky 
			    Way." 174 This spirit realm consisted of myriads of angels, some- 
			    times called "sons of God" in the Bible. Thus, in a sense, the 
			    angels are brothers of Jesus Christ, the first-created Son (who in 
			    his pre-human state was the archangel Michael). 175 Since Satan 
			    was originally one of the spirit-sons of Jehovah, we may say that 
			    Satan, too, was originally a brother of Jesus Christ. 1 ™ The prophet 
			    Daniel was given a vision of hundreds of millions of angels before 
			    God's throne (Daniel 7:9, 10). All these angels are organized 
			    and placed in various positions of service. 177 

			    All together, they [the angels] form the invisible heavenly 
			    organization of Jehovah God, in complete subjection to him 
			    and lovingly obedient to him as their theocratic Head and Life- 
			    giver. From the time of Jehovah's prophetic utterance at Gen- 
			    esis 3:15 concerning the seed of the woman, this heavenly uni- 
			    versal organization has been compared to a faithful wife of a 
			    husband and has been spoken of as Jehovah's woman or wife. 
			    He, the Creator of this heavenly organization, is its husband, 
			    who fathers the seed or offspring it brings forth. 178 
			    At another place, after Genesis 3:15 has been quoted, it is said, 
			    By saying that the serpent would be bruised in the head God 
			    meant that Satan would be destroyed. And it would be done by 
			    the one whom God would choose. That one was the Seed of 
			    the woman. The woman was not disobedient Eve, but rather 
			    God's heavenly organization of faithful spirit creatures. 179 
			    The realm of angels, therefore, constitutes Jehovah's woman 
			    or the heavenly mother. The chief Son of this heavenly mother is 
			    Jesus Christ, who is the seed of the woman alluded to in Genesis 
			    3:15. 180 

			    174 New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 20. 

			    17n Ibid., pp. 26-28. 

			    i™ Let God Be True, p. 57. 

			    177 New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 32. 

			    "« Ibid. 

			    17i) Paradise Lost, p. 34. The Hebrew word used for woman in Gen. 3:15 
			    is 'ishshah. This word is used throughout the chapter to designate Eve. 
			    By what exegetical legerdemain do Jehovah's Witnesses arrive at the 
			    astounding conclusion that 'ishshah in the 15th verse means myriads 
			    of angels? 

			    ]8 ° Ibid. It is not easy to determine when, according to the Witnesses, 
			    the heavenly woman brought forth Jesus. It is said at one place that 
			    God's woman was childless until a.d. 29, when Jesus was baptized and 
			    the Father said, "This is my Son, the beloved" (NWT). These words, 
			    it is stated, mean that the Father now begot Jesus as His spiritual son, 
			    and that the Father's woman, the heavenly organization [also called "the 
			    Jerusalem above"], had now brought forth the first of her seed (New 



			    54 Jehovah's Witnesses 

			    "Just ten days after Jesus' ascension to heaven, God used his 
			    heavenly Zion to bring forth other spiritual children." This hap- 
			    pened on the Day of Pentecost, when the holy spirit was poured 
			    out, and when many faithful Israelite followers were begotten as 
			    spiritual sons. 181 It is further said that the heavenly organization 
			    produces all the other members of the anointed class 18 '; thus this 
			    heavenly organization, and not the earthly church, is the 
			    mother of the 144,000. The earthly congregation of anointed 
			    ones is, in fact, the visible representation of God's woman on 
			    earth. 1 NS 

			    Next God called into being all the tremendous masses of matter 
			    that comprise the material universe; it is this divine act of creation 
			    which is referred to in Genesis 1:1. 184 On pages 34 and 35 of 
			    New Heavens and a New Earth (published in 1953) a guarded 
			    and qualified admission is made that the universe may be billions 
			    of years old; on page 43 of Your Will Be Done On Earth (pub- 
			    lished in 1958), however, it is stated without qualification that 
			    the inanimate material universe is billions of years old. A long 
			    period of time is therefore said to have elapsed between this 
			    original creation and the beginning of the actual week of creation. 185 

			    At length, however, the creative week began: 

			    The time had now come to start getting the earth ready for 
			    the animals and humans that would later live on it. So a period 
			    began that the Bible calls the "first day." This was not a day 
			    of twenty-four hours, but was instead 7,000 years long. 188 



			    Heavens and a New Earlli, p. 153). On p. 201 of this same volume, 
			    however, we are told that it was not until Christ's resurrection that the 
			    heavenly woman became mother to her first divine, immortal, royal 
			    Son. And on pp. 220-21 we are told that God did not open the 
			    womb of His woman for the birth of her royal First-born until 1914. 

			    i8i New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 203. 

			    182 Make Sure of All Things, p. 75. 

			    ]«3 New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 185. As we shall see when we dis- 
			    cuss the fall, some of these angels, under Satan's leadership, rebelled against 
			    God and thus became part of the devil's organization. 

			    i^ Ibid., p. 34. 

			    185 Paradise Lost, p. 10. In What Do the Scriptures Say About "Survival 
			    After Death"? (a booklet published in 1955), p. 58, it is specifically stated 
			    that the visible universe is 4K billion years old. Cf. You May Survive Arma- 
			    geddon (1955), p. 21. 

			    1S0 Ibid. How have the Witnesses arrived at this figure? Since the 7th 
			    day, on which God rested from His creative work, is said to be still in prog- 
			    ress, and since it is assumed that 6,000 years have elapsed from the time of 
			    man's creation to the present, with another 1,000 years to be added to this 
			    Sabbath during the coming millennium, it is inferred that the 7th day is 



			    Doctrines 55 

			    Man was created towards the end of the sixth day, after almost 
			    42,000 years of the creation week had gone by. ,HT The seventh 
			    day, on which God rests from creating, is also a 7,000-year day, 
			    and is now in progress. 

			    Providence. Since Jehovah is recognized as Creator and as 
			    sovereign, and since all of history is said to be firmly under His 
			    control, it may be safely assumed that Jehovah's Witnesses accept 
			    the doctrine of divine providence, though the term is not listed in 
			    their indexes. It is said in Let God Be True (p. 169) that God 
			    has ordained the Sabbath of creation as a means of vindicating 
			    Him "as the Creator of what is good and ... as the Maintainer 
			    and Preserver of such good." This statement implies that God 
			    does uphold and preserve His universe. 

			    Doctrine of Man 
			    the original state of man 

			    The Constitutional Nature of Man. According to Genesis 2:7 
			    man is a combination of two things: the "dust of the ground" 
			    and the "breath of life." "The combining of these two things (or 
			    factors) produced a living soul or creature called man." 1 ** A study 
			    of the way in which the Hebrew word nephesh and the Greek word 
			    psuchee (the Biblical words usually translated soul) are used in 
			    the Scriptures reveals that these terms are nowhere associated with 
			    such words as "immortal, everlasting, eternal, or deathless"; it is 
			    concluded, therefore, that the Bible nowhere teaches that the hu- 
			    man soul is immortal. 189 On the contrary, the Bible teaches that 
			    the human soul is mortal: witness such passages as Ezekiel 18:4, 
			    "the soul that sinneth, it shall die," and Isaiah 53: 12, where Christ, 
			    who is there predicted, is said to have "poured out his soul unto 
			    death." 190 

			    to be 7,000 years long. From this it is concluded that each of the creation 
			    days was of this length (Let God Be True, pp. 168, 178). 

			    IST Paradise Lost, p. 18. It is interesting to note that, though the Witness- 
			    es are willing to accept in one area the results of scientific discoveries which 
			    have led many in our day to conclude that the universe is very old, they 
			    refuse to accept such scientific evidence in another area: namely, as it con- 
			    cerns the age of man. 

			    3«s Let God Be True, p. 68. 

			    i«9 Ibid., p. 69. 

			    1"" Ibid., pp. 70-71. On Mt. 10:28, however, which reads: "Do not 
			    become fearful of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul; but 
			    rather be in fear of him that can destroy both soul and body in Gehenna" 
			    (NWT), their comment is: "the word 'soul' is used [here] as meaning future 



			    56 Jehovah's Witnesses 

			    At another place soul is defined as follows: 

			    A soul, heavenly or earthly, is a living, sentient (or sense- 
			    possessing, conscious, intelligent) creature or person. A soul, 
			    heavenly or earthly, consists of a body together with the life 
			    principle or life force actuating it. m 

			    These statements declare that there can be no soul that exists apart 
			    from the body. A man, it is said, is a soul; he does not possess a 
			    soul. 192 Nothing in Scripture, we are told, indicates that Adam 
			    after his fall into sin would only appear to die, but that his soul 
			    would live on forever. 1 " 3 

			    Jehovah's Witnesses therefore oppose the view that man con- 
			    sists of body and soul; they teach that man is a soul which consists 
			    of a body together with a life principle which actuates it. They 
			    therefore vigorously repudiate the doctrine of the inherent im- 
			    mortality of human souls as the foundation of False religion. It 
			    was the devil, in fact, who originated this doctrine, when he said 
			    to the woman, "Ye shall not surely die" (Gen. 3:4). 194 On the 
			    basis of Ecclesiastes 3:19 and 20 it is further affirmed that men 
			    and beasts die alike. 195 

			    The Image of God. Jehovah's Witnesses declare that man was 
			    created in the image of God. This means that man was endowed 
			    with God's attributes. 

			    To man as a creature with God's attributes was granted the 
			    privilege of holding dominion over the earth and its forms of 
			    life: the birds, fish and animals. Toward these he had the 
			    responsibility of exercising the same attributes as his Creator: 
			    wisdom in directing the affairs charged to him, justice in dealing 

			    life as a soul" (ibid., p. 71). This interpretation, however, is not at all 
			    consistent with the view advanced on earlier pages that the soul is mortal 
			    and may die. The fact is that in Mt. 10:28 we are plainly told that it is 
			    possible to kill the body (sooma) without killing the soul (psuchee); this 
			    passage therefore militates against the Jehovah-Witness contention that the 
			    soul in Scripture is always mortal. 
			    181 Make Sure of All Things, p. 349. 

			    102 Ibid. 

			    193 Let God Be True, p. 74. 

			    ifl< Ibid., pp. 74-75. 

			    1( "> Ibid., p. 75. Note that Jehovah-Witness teaching on the constitutional 
			    nature of man is virtually identical with that of Seventh-day Adventism (The 
			    Four Major Cults, pp. 110-11). It will be recalled that Russell was delivered 
			    from his early skepticism by the teachings of an Adventist minister; it would 
			    appear, therefore, that he borrowed his view of the soul, which was basically 
			    the same as that of present-day Witnesses, from the Adventists (see above, 
			    p. 10). 



			    Doctrines 57 

			    with other creatures of his God, love in unselfishly caring for 
			    the earth and its creatures, and power in properly discharging 
			    his authority to carry on the right worship of the Universal 
			    Sovereign in whose image he was created. — Genesis 1 : 26-28. Iac 

			    On the basis of Psalm 8:4-8 in the King James version it is im- 
			    plied that man was made a little lower than the angels. 197 Man is, 
			    however, superior to the animals, not because he has an immortal 
			    soul, but because (1) he is a higher form of creature, and (2) he 
			    was originally given dominion over the lower forms of animal 
			    life. 198 

			    MAN IN THE STATE OF SIN 

			    The Fall of Man. God created Adam perfect. In support of 
			    this assertion Deuteronomy 32:4 is quoted: "his [God's] work is 
			    perfect." 1 '-* This perfect man did not have to die: 

			    God did not appoint the perfect man to die, but God opened 
			    to him the opportunity of everlasting life in human perfection in 
			    the Edenic paradise. Only if the perfect man disobeyed would 
			    God sentence him to death, and he would cease to exist as a 
			    soul. 200 

			    So then, if man had not sinned, he would not have died. "Had 
			    perfect Adam not sinned, it would have been possible for him, 
			    though mortal, to live on earth forever and to bequeath life to his 
			    children."- 01 The words, "though mortal," imply that Adam, even 
			    if he had remained sinless, would never have obtained immortality. 
			      Yet he would have continued to live on earth forever. How would 
			      this have been possible? We get the answer from Make Sure of 
			      All Things: 

			      Everlasting life: Life in a perfect organism, fleshly for humans 
			      who gain life on earth, spiritual for faithful angels who continue 



			      ] 98 Let God Be True, p. 145. No attempt is here made to indicate any 
			      distinction between these attributes as they occur in God and in man. 

			      ■1»7 Ibid., p. 67; cf. p. 41. 

			      i»s Ibid., p. 68. 

			      15,9 Ibid., p. 117. The application of this passage to the creation of man 
			      is, however, of doubtful warrant. A careful reading of the passage, which 
			      occurs in the Song of Moses, will reveal that the point of the Hebrew word 
			      tamim which is here used is that God is beyond reproach in His providential 
			      dealings with man. 

			      -'"• This Means Everlasting Life, p. 32. 

			      *»i Let God Be True, p. 74. 



			      58 Jehovah's Witnesses 

			      to live in heaven. . . . God through his organization protects 
			      the life of such individuals for all eternity. Such a person, by 
			      his very creation, is dependent upon food, subject to God's 
			      laws governing created things. 202 

			      Adam and Eve, however, did not remain obedient to God; they 
			      fell into sin. The Witnesses accept as literal history the story of 
			      the fall found in Genesis 3. One of God's good angels, who had 
			      been placed in Eden as the overseer of humankind, rebelled against 
			      God. 203 Filled with pride, he desired to be equal to God; hence he 
			      planned to cause disobedience among God's sons and thus to 
			      gather a group of persons who would serve him instead of God. 204 
			      He it was, therefore, who spoke to Eve through the serpent. Be- 
			      guiled by this rebellious spirit, called the Devil or Satan, Eve first 
			      and then Adam ate the fruit of the forbidden tree and thus dis- 
			      obeyed God. 20 " 

			      The penalty for this first sin was death — not eternal torment 
			      in hell but physical death. 2 " Such physical death meant annihila- 
			      tion for man: 20 " 

			      Death did not mean that a soul taken from heaven and en- 
			      cased in Adam's earthly body would escape and return to heaven 
			      and live there immortally. No! At death Adam would return 
			      to the dust. 208 

			      God did not, however, immediately execute this death penalty, 
			      since Satan had now raised an issue which affected the whole uni- 
			      verse, namely, that of the sovereignty of Jehovah. 20 " Because 
			      Jehovah's sovereignty had to be vindicated, Satan was not de- 
			      stroyed at once; he was given time to bring forth seed, against 
			      whom Jehovah would wage war. 210 Adam and Eve were also not 

			      -"-' P. 243. Thus Adam would have been sustained everlastingly by the 
			      food of his earthly paradise home, and his body would never have become 
			      old (Paradise Lost, p. 26). Incidentally, we note that the angels, too, would 
			      have to be sustained by food (!), since their immortality is denied (Make 
			      Sure of All Things, p. 247). 

			      2 <« Let God Be True, pp. 57-58. 

			      2 « Paradise Lost, p. 30. 

			      2 °5 Ibid., pp. 30-32. 

			      aim This Means Everlasting Life, p. 44. 

			      207 New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 84; Paradise Lost, p. 28. 

			      208 New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 88. 
			      - >01 > This Means Everlasting Life, p. 42. 

			      - 11 " Let God Be True, pp. 58-59. By the seed of Satan is meant people 
			      and spirits who are in league with him and form part of his organization. 
			      Cain was the first of Satan's seed (New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 91). 



			      Doctrines 59 

			      put to death at once since they had to be permitted to bring chil- 
			      dren into the world — so that men might learn about God and so 
			      that Jehovah might be vindicated.- 11 When Adam was 930 years 
			      old he died. He did not live out a full thousand-year period, but, 
			      since with God one day is as a thousand years, we may say that 
			      Adam did die in the same day that he ate of the forbidden fruit. 
			      Thus God's word was vindicated: "In the day that thou eatest 
			      thereof thou shalt surely die." 212 

			      There is not a scrap of evidence that Adam repented. He 
			      was a willful rebel and was beyond repentance, and his sentence 
			      is beyond recall. . . . Adam died and went nowhere but to 
			      the dust from which he had been taken. 213 

			      Original Sin. What were the results of Adam's sin for his de- 
			      scendants? Adam brought death not only on himself but on all 
			      the race descended from him. 214 Other results of Adam's fall in- 
			      cluded inborn sin, imperfection, and disease. 215 Though we do 
			      not have anywhere a clear exposition of what this inborn sin in- 
			      volves, Let God Be True speaks of both condemnation and dis- 
			      ability. On page 1 1 9 we read about the "inherited condemnation 
			      of Adam's descendants," and also of the "inherited disability under 
			      which all are born." On page 117 the results of Adam's sin are 
			      expressed as follows: "All his [Adam's] children, we and our an- 
			      cestors, were born following his sin." 

			      It should be added, however, that Jehovah's Witnesses do not 
			      at all have the same understanding of "inborn sin" that is found, 
			      say, in the Westminster Confession, the Heidelberg Catechism, or 
			      the Augsburg Confession. According to Romans 8 : 7 no one who 
			      still has the "mind of the flesh" can be subject to the law of God, 
			      and according to I John 5 : 1 no one who is not born again or be- 
			      gotten of God can believe that Jesus is the Christ. The Witnesses, 

			      A large group of angels joined Satan in his rebellion and became demons. 
			      It is contended that the fall of the angels is depicted in Genesis 6:1-4, the 
			      "sons of God" in this passage being interpreted as angels who "materialized 
			      in flesh," and the "daughters of men" being understood to have been human 
			      women (ibid., pp. 91-94). 

			      211 This Means Everlasting Life, p. 42. 

			      -''-' The Truth Shall Make You Free, pp. 111-113. Though the days 
			      of creation are thus said to have been 7,000 years long, and though in 
			      prophetic sections of the Bible a day is said to equal a year, the day in 
			      which Adam lived is alleged to have been 1.000 years long! 

			      2 is Ibid., p. 113. 

			      i!i4 TVfif Heavens and a New Earth, p. 89. 

			      21 '< Religion for Mankind, p. 63. 



			      60 Jehovah's Witnesses 

			      however, do not agree with this clear teaching of Scripture. They 
			      declare that only the 144,000 have been and will be born again 
			      or begotten of God. Since this congregation of 144,000 began to 
			      be gathered after Pentecost,- 1 B no one could have been regenerated 
			      before Pentecost. Yet many served God faithfully in Old Testa- 
			      ment times, according to them, and will therefore be raised as 
			      other sheep during the millennium. Furthermore, since Pente- 
			      cost, and particularly since 1931 (they are rather vague on the 
			      period between Pentecost and 1931), the vast majority of Je- 
			      hovah's Witnesses have been, and are still, other sheep. These 
			      other sheep however, cannot be born again. Yet they are said 
			      to be able to exercise True faith,- 17 to be faithful to Jehovah, 218 to 
			      belong to "obedient mankind,"- 1 " and to dedicate themselves to do 
			      God's will.--" The Witnesses, therefore, teach that a person can 
			      believe and be faithful to Jehovah without having been born again! 
			      I conclude that, though Jehovah's Witnesses appear to teach an 
			      inherited disability on account of Adam's sin, their theology belies 
			      this assertion. For a "disability" which enables unregenerate man 
			      to have True faith, to dedicate his life to God, and to remain faith- 
			      ful to Jehovah is no disability at all! 

			      Doctrine of Christ 
			      the person of christ 

			      The Prehuman State. In order to understand Jehovah-Witness 
			      teaching on the person of Christ, we shall have to distinguish be- 
			      tween a prehuman, a human, and a posthuman state. To begin 
			      with the prehuman state, Christ, it is said, was the first creature 
			      of Jehovah. 2 - 1 During this prehuman state, which lasted from the 
			      time of the Son's creation to the time when he was born of Mary, 
			      Christ was the Logos or Word of the Father. This does not mean, 
			      however, that he was equal to the Father; the title Logos only 
			      implies that the Son was the spokesman for God the Father to 
			      other creatures that were called into being after him. 222 Thus the 

			      21 if Neve Heavens and a New Earth, p. 203. 

			      - 17 This Means Everlasting Life, p. 295. 

			      ^i* Let God Be True, p. 231. 

			      l>19 jVeiv Heavens and a New Earth, p. 336. 

			      --o Let God Be True, p. 298. 

			      221 See above, p. 47. 

			      --- Let God Be True, p. 33; The Truth Sliall Make You Free, p. 44. 



			      Doctrines 6 1 

			      Son was the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah and, as such, su- 
			      perior to all other creatures. 223 

			      Jehovah's Witnesses insist, however, that neither in this state 
			      nor in any subsequent state is the Son equal to Jehovah. As a 
			      matter of fact, during his prehuman state the Son was really an 
			      angel. Previous to the Son's coming to earth as a man he was not 
			      known in heaven as Jesus Christ, but as Michael; when we read 
			      in Jude 9 about Michael the archangel, we are to understand this 
			      expression as a designation of Jesus Christ in his prehuman 
			      state.- 24 Between Christ in his prehuman state and the angels, 
			      therefore, there is a difference only of degree but not of kind; it 
			      will be recalled that, according to the Witnesses, the angels are 
			      higher than man, but only creatures. 

			      Yet, though the Son was only a creature during his pre-human 
			      state, Jehovah's Witnesses insist that he was at that time some 
			      kind of god. On the basis of their translation of John 1 : 1 ("In 
			      [the] beginning the Word was, and the Word was with God, and 
			      the Word was a god," NWT), they call the Word "a god," 225 or 
			      say that he had "a godly quality." 220 The Witnesses interpret the 
			      so-called kenosis passage of Philippians 2:5-8 as meaning that 
			      the Son "did not follow the course of the Devil and plot and scheme 
			      to make himself like or equal to the Most High God and to rob God 
			      or usurp God's place." 227 To support this interpretation they ap- 
			      peal to their own renderings of the passage in the New World 
			      Translation and in the Emphatic Diaglott , 228 

			      While he was in this prehuman state, the Son, in common with 
			      the other angels, did not possess immortality. Later, however, 
			      Jehovah "opened up to his Son the opportunity to gain immor- 
			      tality." 229 

			      The Human State. The following quotation from a recent book 
			      sets forth in some detail the Jehovah-Witness view of the concep- 

			      ■m The Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 44. 

			      -- 4 New Heavens and a New Earth, pp. 28-30. These pages also contain 
			      the Scriptural evidence adduced to prove this point. 

			      -- >5 Let God Be True, p. 34. 

			      ^« The Word — Who Is He? (booklet pub. in 1962), p. 56. 

			      22T Let God Be True, pp. 34-35. 

			      -- 8 Ibid., pp. 32, 35. These passages, and others adduced by Jehovah's 
			      Witnesses to substantiate their view of the person of Christ, will be dealt 
			      with more fully in the Appendix. 

			      --■' The Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 44. Cf. above, n. 202, and see 
			      discussion of Christ's posthuman state. 



			      62 Jehovah's Witnesses 

			      tion, birth, and nature of Jesus Christ while he was on earth: 

			      To become born of Mary the heavenly Son had to lay aside 
			      all his heavenly glory and position. At God's due time for 
			      his only-begotten Son to become a man, Jehovah took the 
			      perfect life of his only-begotten Son and transferred it from 
			      heaven to the egg cell in the womb of the unmarried girl 
			      Mary. God, by his almighty power, was able to take the 
			      personality of his only-begotten Son, his life pattern, and put 
			      this personality within the powers of the tiny bundle of live 
			      energy that he placed into the womb of Mary. Thus God's Son 
			      was conceived or given a start as a human creature. It was 
			      a miracle. Under Jehovah's holy power the child Jesus, con- 
			      ceived in this way, grew in Mary's womb to the point of birth. 

			      Thus the child Jesus was born with all the marvelous qualities 
			      of righteousness in him just as a child inherits qualities from 
			      his father. Having a perfect Father as his life source, Jesus 
			      did not inherit imperfection from his imperfect mother Mary. 230 

			      From these paragraphs it is clear that the Witnesses do not 
			      deny the virgin birth of Christ, as has recently been alleged. 281 Note 
			      that what is said to have been transferred from heaven to Mary's 
			      womb was the "life," the "personality," or the "life pattern" of the 
			      Son of God, who, it will be recalled, was never equal to Jehovah 
			      but was only a created angel. What happened when Jesus was 
			      born, therefore, was not the incarnation of God. ". . . Jesus' birth 
			      on earth was not an incarnation. " a:!L> Christ was therefore not God 
			      in the flesh. 

			      But now the question arises: Is there real continuity between 
			      the Son of God in his prehuman and his human state? Was the 
			      child born of Mary really the same individual who existed previ- 
			      ously in heaven as the Archangel Michael? To this question it is 

			      - !t " Paradise Lost, p. 127. Cf. Let God Be True, p. 36; The Kingdom is at 
			      Hand, p. 49; New Heavens and a New Earth, pp. 150, 153. On the last- 
			      named page the work of the spirit in overshadowing Mary is also mentioned. 

			      - :s ' John H. Gerstner, The Theology of the Major Sects, p. 36. 

			      - :1 - Religion for Mankind, p. 231. It is quite revealing to note what the 
			      Jehovah-Witness conception of incarnation is: "Moreover, if a mere in- 
			      carnation of the Son of God had been intended, then it would not have 
			      been necessary for him to have his life transferred to an embryo in the 
			      virgin's womb and to be developed there and finally born as a helpless infant. 
			      He could still have remained a spirit person and materialized a fully de- 
			      veloped fleshly body and clothed himself with it, just as . . . the ange! 
			      Gabriel did when appearing visibly to Mary" {The Truth Shall Make You 
			      Free, p. 245). Actually, however, what is here described is not an incarna- 
			      tion but a temporary assumption of a body for the purpose of bringing 
			      a message. 



			      Doctrines 63 

			      difficult to give an unambiguous answer. On the one hand, Je- 
			      hovah's Witnesses frequently speak of "Christ's prehuman exist- 
			      ence, "- : ™ say that the angel Michael was actually Jesus Christ in 
			      his prehuman spirit form, 234 and assert that it was God's only- 
			      begotten Son who became a man.- 3 -' Other passages from their 
			      writings, however, imply that there was no real continuity between 
			      Michael and the man Jesus Christ: 

			      That the Son of God born on earth was no mighty spirit per- 
			      son clothing himself with a baby's fleshly form and pretending 
			      to be absolutely ignorant like a newborn infant is proved by 
			      the scripture (Philippians 2:5-8), which shows he laid aside 
			      completely his spirit existence. . . .- : " ! 

			      By this miracle [the virgin birth) he was born a man (Philip- 
			      pians 2:7 . . .). He was not a spirit-human hybrid, a man 
			      and at the same time a spirit person. He was not clothed upon 
			      with flesh over an invisible spirit person, but he WAS flesh. 237 

			      If Christ, however, was not a spirit person during his human 
			      state, but only a man, was not his birth the birth of a new indi- 
			      vidual, rather than a transfer of a heavenly life to the womb of 
			      Mary? If Christ completely laid aside his previous spirit existence, 
			      how could he still be the individual who had lived in that spirit 
			      existence? The thrust of the above two quotations is clearly this: 
			      when Christ was born of Mary, he stopped being a spirit person 
			      and became a man — nothing more than a man. 

			      One point has become very clear: Jehovah's Witnesses do not 
			      believe that Christ had (or has) two natures. While on earth 
			      Christ had only one nature: the nature of a man. Since previous 
			      to his birth from Mary, the Son of God is said to have had a spirit 
			      nature, of which he divested himself at the time he came to earth, 
			      we must conclude, according to Watchtower teaching, that the 
			      Christ who was born in Bethlehem is not the same individual who 
			      existed previously as the Archangel Michael. 238 

			      ~ ss Let God Be True, p. 34; New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 28; The 
			      Word — Who Is He, p. 38. 

			      •s.u j^ew Heavens and a New Earth, p. 27; cf. p. 30. 

			      - S!i Paradise Lost, p. 127. 

			      ^« The Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 246. 

			      - [i ~ Religion for Mankind, jp. 231. 

			      - 38 Jt is thus evident that Jehovah's Witnesses reject Chalcedon as well as 
			      Nicaea. The Witnesses might counter the above argumentation by saying 
			      that since the life of the heavenly being was transferred to Mary's womb 
			      there is some continuity after all. In reply I would say: But the life which 
			      was transferred was not the life of a spirit person. Where, then, is the 



			      64 Jehovah's Witnesses 

			      It should further be added that Christ was born as "a perfect 
			      human creature."-™ The reason for this is that Christ had to be 
			      the absolute equivalent of the perfect man Adam in Eden. Since, 
			      according to Deuteronomy 19:21, God had said "Soul (nephesh) 
			      will be for soul, eye for eye, tooth for tooth . . ." (NWT), it is 
			      obvious that another perfect man must be sacrificed to undo the 
			      harm wrought by Adam's fall. 240 "Hence as the human life priv- 
			      ileges had been forfeited for the human race by its perfect father 
			      Adam, through sin, those life privileges had to be repurchased 
			      by the sacrifice of a perfect human life like Jesus'." 241 

			      Before we go on to consider Christ's posthuman state, some- 
			      thing should be said about the significance of Christ's baptism since 
			      this will shed light on the Witnesses' view of his person. When 
			      Jesus was baptized, there came a voice from heaven saying, "This 
			      is my son, the beloved, whom I have approved" (Mt. 3:17, 
			      NWT). This meant that "as God by his spirit overshadowing 
			      Mary transferred his Son's life from heaven to her womb, now God 
			      by that same spirit begot Jesus to become his spiritual son." 242 
			      The coming down of the spirit upon Christ in the form of a dove 
			      represented the fact that Christ was now anointed with God's 
			      spirit, thus becoming Jehovah's High Priest. 243 By this act Christ 
			      became " 'a new creation' with spirit life in the invisible heavens in 
			      view." 244 By this act Christ also became God's Anointed One or 
			      Christ — the Heir of the heavenly Kingdom. 24 "' 

			      According to the above statements Christ was not Jehovah's 
			      High Priest, nor the Messiah, nor the Heir of the heavenly King- 
			      dom until he had been baptized! More serious still, these state- 
			      continuity? Since Jehovah's Witnesses do not teach the pre-existence of 
			      man, we must conclude that the life of Jesus as a man began with his 
			      miraculous conception. But this was a human life, not an angelic life. 
			      239 New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 151. 
			      - 40 Ibid., pp. 151-52. 
			      - 41 Ibid., p. 152. 

			      -*- Ibid., p. 153. At another place it is said that at this time God "begot 
			      Jesus to be his spiritual Son once more instead of a human Son" (Lei God 
			      Be True, p. 38). The words "once more" imply that the Son was a spir- 
			      itual Son during his prehuman state, but that he ceased being a spiritual 
			      Son when he was conceived and born of Mary. This statement thus under- 
			      scores the discontinuity that exists between the first and second states of 
			      Christ's existence. 
			      imm New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 153. 

			      2W Your Will Be Done, p. 138. It is implied that if Christ had not been 
			      thus spirit-begotten, he would not have been entitled to enjoy spirit life in 
			      heaven when his earthly life was over. 
			      2*5 Ibid. 



			      Doctrines 65 

			      merits clearly avow that Christ was not a spiritual or spirit-begotten 
			      Son of God until his baptism. Since the members of the anointed 
			      class must also become spiritual sons,- 16 and be begotten by God's 
			      spirit, 247 it is obvious that there is a very close analogy between 
			      Christ and the members of the anointed class. Since Christ while 
			      on earth was not God, and not a spirit person, but only a man 
			      (though a sinless man), we may say that the difference between 
			      Christ and the 144,000 is not one of kind but only one of degree. 

			      The Posthuman State. Jehovah God raised Christ from the 
			      dead, "not as a human Son, but as a mighty immortal spirit 
			      Son. . . ." 24R The physical resurrection of Jesus Christ is there- 
			      fore denied; Christ was raised not with the same body which he 
			      had before, but as a "spirit Son, no longer flesh. 249 The reasoning 
			      behind this teaching is as follows: In order to atone for the sin 
			      of Adam, Christ had to sacrifice his human body. This means 
			      that he had to renounce it permanently and could not get it 
			      back again. Therefore God raised him as a spirit Son. 2,r> " The 
			      Scripture passage usually cited to substantiate this view is I Peter 
			      3:18, "Being put to death in the flesh, but being made alive in the 
			      spirit" (NWT). 

			      What happened to the body of Christ? ". . . Jehovah God dis- 
			      posed of that body in his own way, just as he disposed of the body 
			      of Moses, who was a type of Christ Jesus; but no one knows 
			      how." 251 Rutherford had surmised that the Lord may have pre- 
			      served it somewhere to exhibit to the people in the millennial 
			      age. 252 

			      At another place it is stated that Christ was raised not with a 
			      body of flesh, but "in a spirit body." 2 " 3 This "spirit body," how- 
			      ever, which Christ had after his resurrection, was not a visible 
			      body. How, then, did Christ reveal himself to his disciples after 
			      his resurrection? "By materializing fleshly bodies on the occasions 

			      246 Let God Be True, p. 300. 

			      247 This Means Everlasting Life, p. 121. 
			      24H Let God Be True, p. 40. 

			      249 Religion for Mankind, p. 259; cf. Make Sure of All Things, p. 3 14. 

			      250 Religion for Mankind, p. 259. 

			      251 The Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 264. 

			      2 " 2 The Harp of God, 1928, p. 173. If, however, it had to be demonstrat- 
			      ed that Christ had permanently renounced his body, why was his body not 
			      left in the tomb? 

			      263 The Truth Shall Make Yon Free, p. 264. Cf. Make Sure of All 
			      Things, p. 349, where we read that a heavenly soul, as well as an earthly 
			      soul, consists of "a body together with the life principle or life force actu- 
			      ating it." 



			      66 Jehovah's Witnesses 

			      of his appearances," each such body being different from the 
			      others. 2r>4 These were temporary materializations, comparable to 
			      those in which angels had occasionally appeared to men. 2nr> 

			      At the time of his resurrection Christ was given immortality as 
			      a reward for his faithful course on earth; he was, in fact, the first 
			      creature to receive this gift. 2 "' 6 God now exalted his Son to be 
			      higher than he was before he lived and died as a man, and made 
			      him to be Head under Jehovah of God's capital organization over 
			      the universe. 257 The Son now resumed the name Michael, "to 
			      tie him with his prehuman existence. " 2r,s 

			      Since, according to Watchtower teaching, there is no such 
			      thing as an immaterial soul which persists after death, and since 
			      Christ's material body was not raised, we are forced to conclude 
			      that Christ was actually annihilated when he died. While on earth 
			      Christ was only a man, with a nature which was only human; this 
			      human nature, however, was sacrificed on the cross 2 ™ so com- 
			      pletely that he could not get it back again. It will not do to say 
			      that Christ sacrificed only his human body and not his human 
			      soul, since the Witnesses recognize no human soul which survives 
			      the body. The life which Christ now enjoys is not human life, 
			      nor the life of a divine Person with a human nature, but angelic 
			      life — life as a spirit-creature called Michael. It is obvious, 
			      therefore, that Christ after his resurrection is for the Witnesses not 
			      in any sense human, or a being with a human nature. Thus 
			      there is no real continuity, either, between the second and the third 
			      state of Christ's existence. For this reason Jehovah's Witnesses 
			      cannot really speak of the exaltation of Christ, since the individual 
			      who is exalted is not the same being as the individual who was 
			      humiliated. 

			      I conclude that what the three states of Christ's existence in 

			      234 The Truth Shall Make You Free, pp. 265-67. 

			      -'55 Let God Be True, p. 40. 

			      - H8 Ibid., p. 74. 

			      -'" Ibid., p. 40. 

			      -'*s Your Will Be Done, p. 316. 

			      - r,! » Jehovah's Witnesses prefer to speak of "torture stake" instead of 
			      "cross," since they believe that Jesus was put to death on a simple upright 
			      stake, without a crossbar; their NWT, therefore, also renders the Greek 
			      verb stuuro-oo (crucify) as "impale." H. J. Spier, in his De Jehovah's 
			      Getuigen en de Bijbel (Kampen: Kok, 1961), pp. 132-33, has shown the 
			      untenability of this interpretation. See also Alfred Edersheim, Life and 
			      Times of Jesus the Messiah (New York: Longmans, Green, & Co., 1901), 
			      11, 584-85; and J. D. Douglas, ed.. The New Bible Dictionary (Eerdmans, 
			      1962), p. 279. 



			      Doctrines 67 

			      Watchtower theology really amount to is this: angel — man — 
			      angel, with no real continuity between the three. A little reflection 
			      will reveal how devastating this view is of the Christology of the 
			      Scriptures. The individual who laid down his life at Calvary was 
			      not the individual who existed previously in heaven and was God's 
			      agent in creation; the individual who is now ruling over his 
			      heavenly Kingdom is not the individual who died on the cross for 
			      us. Really, Jehovah's Witnesses have three Christs, none of whom 
			      is equal to Jehovah and none of whom is the Christ of the Scrip- 
			      tures. 

			      THE WORK OF CHRIST 

			      The Atonement. As we have seen, because of Adam's sin all 
			      men have inherited physical death and inborn sin. Jesus Christ, 
			      the Witnesses teach, made atonement for us and thus removed for 
			      believers the results of Adam's sin. The word atonement, it is 
			      said, is drawn from the expression at one, and means that what 
			      makes satisfaction for another thing which has been forfeited must 
			      be "at one" with that other thing, that is, must be exactly equivalent 
			      to it.-' 60 When applied to the work of Christ, atonement means 
			      that "the human life that Jesus Christ laid down in sacrifice must 
			      be exactly equal to that life which Adam forfeited for all his off- 
			      spring; it must be a perfect human life, no more, no less." 261 

			      This human life which Jesus sacrificed for his people is called a 
			      ransom. A ransom is defined as "that which buys back, loosens 
			      or releases . . . more especially, releasing from inherited sin and 
			      from prospects of eternal death as a result of sin." 262 God provid- 
			      ed through Christ a redemptive price whereby "those of men who 
			      have faith in God's provision may come into harmony with him 
			      and, serving him faithfully, they may receive the gift of life, being 
			      freed from inherited sin and from eternal death as a result of 
			      sin." 283 

			      Since what was lost in Adam was perfect human life with its 
			      rights and earthly prospects, what is redeemed or bought back is 

			      L'fio You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 38-39. Webster's New Collegiate 
			      Dictionary, 1956 ed., agrees that atone comes from at one, but defines at 
			      one in this sense as meaning "in concord or friendship" (p. 55). It would 
			      appear that the Jehovah-Witness derivation of this word is not accurate. 

			      - <n You May Survive Armageddon, p. 39. 

			      -'«: Make Sure of All Things, pp. 293-94. 

			      - 8:i Let God Be True, p. 113. By "eternal death" in this quotation is 
			      meant annihilation. 



			      68 Jehovah's Witnesses 

			      also perfect human life with its rights and earthly prospects. 264 
			      This is exactly what Jesus laid down in death: a perfect human 
			      life, with all its rights and earthly prospects. Since this human life 
			      was not given back to Jesus, this sacrificed human life remained 
			      effective, 

			      a thing of value with purchasing power, hence with ransoming 
			      or redemptive power. The value of the perfect human life was 
			      now available for use on behalf of faithful men needing to be 
			      ransomed thereby. 285 

			      It is expressly denied that the atonement of Christ was a satis- 
			      faction of divine justice: 

			      Justice was satisfied in mankind's suffering death, the just 
			      penalty of sin. So the ransom is an expression of God's mercy, 
			      his undeserved kindness toward mankind. 20 " 

			      This statement must be understood against the background of Je- 
			      hovah-Witness teaching that the penalty for Adam's sin was not 
			      eternal torment in hell but physical death which was to be followed 
			      by annihilation. The purpose of Christ's death, then, was to 
			      rescue men from the annihilation in which they would otherwise 
			      have remained after death. The question, however, must now be 
			      raised : what happens to the justice of God when people are raised 
			      from the dead? Since God's justice required man's death and 
			      annihilation, how can it be said that the justice of God is satisfied 
			      by the death of people who are later raised again? If Christ did 
			      not in any sense satisfy God's justice by his atoning work, we shall 
			      have to conclude that, for Jehovah's Witnesses, the justice of God 
			      is so weak that He simply relaxes its demands in the case of those 
			      who come to believe in Christ. 

			      What is said about Christ's removal of the curse, however, is not 
			      consistent with the above. It is taught that Christ had to hang on 
			      the "stake" as an accursed one in order to deliver the Jews from 
			      the curse of the law which rested upon them for their transgres- 
			      sions, particularly for their rejection of God's Messiah. 2 "" At an- 
			      other place we are told that Christ died not just for the curse on 
			      the Jews, but for the "condemnation of sin on all mankind."-" 8 If 
			      this is so, there must be a sense in which Christ's death did satisfy 

			      ^64 ibid., p. 114. 
			      w> Ibid., p. 116. 

			      - eo Ibid., p. 115. The implication is that the ransom was an expression 
			      of God's mercy but not in any sense an expression of God's justice. 
			      - c '~ This Means Everlasting Life, pp. 109-10; Paradise Lost, p. 144. 
			      - Iix Religion for Mankind, p. 148. 



			      Doctrines 69 

			      God's justice or appease God's wrath. For how otherwise could 
			      God remove the curse of the law or the condemnation of sin? 

			      The Extent of the Atonement. For whom did Christ make this 
			      atonement? Not for everyone. It is specifically stated that Adam 
			      is not included among those ransomed. 2(!!l Those who remain 
			      eternally dead and are thus permanently annihilated are also said 
			      not to have been ransomed. 2 ™ It is further stated that Christ laid 
			      down his life for the other sheep as well as for the bride class,'- 71 
			      for non-Jews as well as for Jews, 272 for all the "worthy ones of 
				Adam's children, " 2 ™ and for all the believers of Adam's family. 274 
				This ransom provides the basis for the "resurrection of the dead 
				who are in God's memory and their eventual gaining of life." 275 
				The ransom, in fact, extends its benefits even to those who "prac- 
				ticed vile things" on earth, but who will be raised during the 
				millennium and will then be given the opportunity of responding 
				to the gospel. 276 

				As we reflect upon this view of the atonement, we note how far 
				it falls short of Biblical doctrine. First, the sacrifice brought 
				by Christ, for the Witnesses, was not of infinite value since it was 
				the sacrifice of a mere human life. There is no hint in their teach- 
				ings of the thought expressed in Anselm's Cur Deus Homo that 
				the "price paid to God for the sin of man [must] be something 
				greater than all the universe besides God," 277 and that therefore the 
				one who pays this price must in his own person be God. 

				- lii) Let God Be True, p. 119. The reason here given is: '^Because he was 
				a willful sinner, was justly sentenced to death, and died deservedly, and God 
				would not reverse his just judgment and give Adam life." Apparently the 
				Witnesses exclude the possibility that Adam may have repented of his sin, 
				and may have exercised faith in the promise of salvation recorded in Gen. 
				3:15 (see above, n. 213). 

				-7° Make Sure of All Things, p. 296. 

				- 71 You May Survive Armageddon, p. 230. 

				-'?* Let God Be True, p. 1 19. 

				- 73 Paradise Lost, p. 143. 

				- >74 Lei God Be True, p. 119. 

				-' 7 <"> Ibid., p. 120. 

				278 Ibid., p. 280. As will be seen when we discuss the doctrine of salva- 
				tion and the doctrine of the last things, however, what really determines 
				the salvation of those to whom Christ's ransom is to be applied is not the 
				merits of Christ but the works of men. Note, e.g., the following statement: 
				". . . the course of an individual determines whether he will ultimately re- 
				ceive benefit from the ransom sacrifice of Christ or not" (ibid., p. 120). 

				-~~ Translated by Sidney Deane (La Salle: Open Court, 1959), p. 244 
				(Book II, Chap. 6). Scripture proof for the full deity of the Saviour will 
				be given in the Appendix. Suffice it here to say that Phil. 2:5-8, when prop- 
				erly interpreted, teaches that the one who died on the cross was fully God. 



				70 Jehovah's Witnesses 

				It should further be pointed out that, though Jehovah's Witnesses 
				repeatedly say that God sent His Son Christ Jesus to earth to pro- 
				vide this ransom, 278 and that the one who did the ransoming work 
				was therefore the same individual who was previously with God in 
				heaven, 279 their teachings about the person of Christ do not war- 
				rant this conclusion. For, as has been pointed out, there is no 
				real continuity between Christ as he appeared in the flesh and the 
				previously existing Archangel Michael. 280 For the Witnesses, 
				therefore, God did not really send his only-begotten Son (even if 
				one understands this term as designating the created Logos) into 
				the world to ransom man from his sins. Rather, He caused a sin- 
				less man to be miraculously conceived by Mary; this man was not 
				even a "spirit-begotten son of God" at birth, but only a human son. 
				He was different from other men only in two respects: ( 1 ) he had 
				been born of a virgin, and (2) he lived a perfect life. But Je- 
				hovah's Witnesses cannot consistently maintain that the individual 
				whom they call Jesus Christ was the same individual who had 
				existed previously with God as His only-begotten Son and who had 
				been God's agent in creation. 

				At this point the question cannot be suppressed: Why should 
				the sacrificed life of Jesus Christ have so much value that it can 
				serve to ransom millions of people from annihilation? It was a 
				perfect human life which was sacrificed, to be sure; we must not 
				minimize this point. But it was the perfect human life of someone 
				who was only a man. Could the life of a mere man, offered in 
				sacrifice, serve to purchase a multitude which no man can num- 
				ber? 281 

				Doctrine of Salvation 

				Who will benefit from the ransom of Christ? At this point the 
				anti-Reformation character of Watchtower teachings becomes very 
				clear: "By willingly laying down his human life he [Christ] could 
				use its right to buy back the worthy ones of Adam's children." 282 
				It is, however, impossible to discuss Jehovah-Witness soteriology 
				without distinguishing between the "anointed class" and the "other 
				sheep," since the way of salvation is not the same for both: 

				'■"» Let God Be True, p. 113. 

				™ Ibid., p. 115. 

				280 See above, pp. 62-63. 

				2,si what the Witnesses teach about the work of Christ (that is, the spirit 
				creature who "arose" from Jesus' grave) since his "resurrection" will be 
				treated under the Doctrine of the Last Things. 

				- H2 Paradise Lost, p. 143. Cf. n. 276 above. 



				Doctrines 7 1 

				All who by reason of faith in Jehovah God and in Christ 
				Jesus dedicate themselves to do God's will and then faithfully 
				carry out their dedication will be rewarded with everlasting 
				life (Romans 6:23). However, that life will not be the same 
				for all. The Bible plainly shows that some of these, that is, 
				  144,000, will share in heavenly glory with Christ Jesus, while 
				  the others will enjoy the blessings of life down here on earth 
				  (Revelation 14:1, 3; Micah 4:1-5). 2H:i 

				  The Anointed Class. Since the way of salvation is more elab- 
				  orate and complex for the anointed class than it is for the other 
				  sheep, we shall first look at the doctrine of salvation as it applies 
				  to the anointed class or 144,000. How do they obtain salvation? 

				  They must first believe and repent. Faith is defined as follows: 

				  Faith means that by reason of Bible knowledge one has a 
				  firm assurance that God exists and that he will reward those 
				  who earnestly seek him, and that the Bible is his truth and 
				  man's sure guide. It further means to accept Jesus not only as 
				  a Teacher and Example but also as one's Savior and Ransomer. 
				  Such faith causes one to be converted or turned, to change his 
				  course of action. 284 

				  This faith includes not only knowledge of the message of the Bible 
				  but also acceptance of Christ, followed by a change of life. 28n 

				  Repentance is also required. In Make Sure of All Things re- 
				  pentance is thus defined: "Recognition and admission of a wrong 
				  condition or course of action, and a sincere sorrow with determin- 
				  ation, motivated by a wholehearted desire to conform to right 
				  principles, to turn forever from such wrong course and take a 
				  course in harmony with God's will" (p. 307). In the light of what 
				  was said about faith, it is evident that repentance is a fruit of True 
				  faith. 

				  True faith and True repentance thus require that one should 
				  "give up one's selfish course and dedicate oneself to do God's will, 
				  just as Jesus did." 2sa Dedication, which is required of all who 
				  want to serve God, is defined as follows: 

				  aw Let God Be True, p. 298. 

				  ->« Ibid., pp. 295-96. 

				  " M It is said in Make Sure of All Things, p. 120, that faith is a gift from 
				  God. On the other hand, however, after the authors of Paradise Lost 
				  have described faith, repentance, and dedication, they go on to say, "This 
				  much the individual can do. The rest [meaning the other steps necessary 
				  for becoming a member of the anointed class, here called "the spiritual 
				    nation"] depends upon God" (p. 152). 

				    2«« Let God Be True, p. 296. 



				    72 Jehovah's Witnesses 

				    Christian dedication is the act of a person in setting himself 
				    apart by solemn agreement, unreservedly and unconditionally, 
				    to do the will of Jehovah God through Christ Jesus, as that will 
				    is set forth in the Bible, being made plain by God's holy spirit. 
				    It means one must live a holy life, separate from this world, 
				    and serve God henceforth to eternity. 1 '" 7 

				    Since Jesus publicly confessed his dedication to do his Father's 
				    will by being baptized, everyone who has similarly agreed to do 
				    God's will should be baptized, as a symbol of his dedication. This 
				    baptism, however, must be by immersion. - m 

				    In order to enter into the heavenly glory for which they are 
				    destined, the members of the anointed class "must undergo the 
				    sacrifice of all human life right and hopes, even as Jesus did." 289 
				    Since, however, these people are sinners, they do not have either 
				    the right to life or an acceptable body to offer as a sacrifice. Hence 
				    they must first be justified or declared righteous before they can 
				    undergo the sacrifice of human life-right and hopes.- 9 " 

				    When and how does this justification occur? It is not easy to 
				    answer the first of these two questions since it is said that God de- 
				    clares such a person righteous "because of his faith in Christ's 
				    blood." 291 Actually, these individuals already exercised faith in 
				    Christ's blood before their baptism since faith is a prerequisite for 
				    baptism. 29 - It appears, however, that this justification does not 
				    take place until after one has been baptized. 293 As far as the 
				    "how" of this justification is concerned, we read in Let God Be 
				    True: 

				    Christ Jesus then [after one has exercised faith and has dedi- 
				    cated himself to God] acts as an advocate, covering the sins of 
				    such a dedicated one by the merit of his sacrifice. The dedi- 
				    cated one is now in position to be justified or declared righteous 
				    by God, and thus he has access to God through Christ Jesus. 
				    He has an acceptable body and the right to perfect life on earth, 
				    and all this can be presented for sacrifice with Christ Jesus. 294 



				    287 
				    288 



				    Make Sure of All Things, p. 9 I . 
				    Lei God Be True, pp. 296-98. 

				    2™ Ibid., p. 299. 

				    2 «" Ibid. 

				    -91 Paradise Lost, p. 152. 

				    -'«-' Ibid. 

				    *»» Ibid. Cf. Let God Be True, p. 299. 

				    l»94 p 299. See also Paradise Lost, p, 152. What is puzzling, however, 
				    is that, though this justification is described in these two places as an act in 
				    which God declares these people righteous, in New Heavens and a New 
				    Earth, p. 167, we read, "For their [the members of the anointed class] prov- 



				    Doctrines 73 

				    It is to be noted that the justification of the 144,000 is solely for 
				    the purpose of enabling them to sacrifice their right to life on earth 
				    so that they can share the life of Christ in heaven. 293 

				    What is the next step? "God now choosing them [the 144,000], 
				    he accepts the High Priest's sacrifice of the dedicated ones and 
				    causes his active force or holy spirit to act upon them so as to 
				    bring them forth as spiritual sons with the hope of life in the 
				    heavens and he [God] acknowledges them as his sons." 2 " 6 So the 
				    members of the anointed class are now brought forth as spiritual 
				    sons of God. At this time God gives to such persons his holy 
				    spirit; 297 they now also have "prospects and hopes for spirit life 
				    by resurrection to heaven." 298 

				    These persons now become members of Christ's body, and thus 
				    receive of his anointing. 299 God now consecrates them or sets 
				    them apart for a holy work; 300 this anointing or consecration means 
				    that they are made kings and priests of God, in which double ca- 
				    pacity they will rule, together with Christ, over the rest of man- 
				    kind. :,in The holy spirit is for the anointed ones a pledge guaran- 
				    teeing their heavenly inheritance/"' 2 

				    These anointed ones do not yet have immortality at this time, 
				    but have a hope of it set before them and therefore seek it as a 
				    prize. "To gain that incorruptible prize they must be loyal to 
				    God even at the cost of their human lives." 308 

				    Before such members of Christ's body can receive their heav- 
				    enly inheritance they must be set apart more and more from 
				    this world and to the holy service of Jehovah God, demonstrat- 
				    ing faithful imitators of his Son to the close of their earthly life, making 
				    their calling and their being chosen certain, Jehovah God will pronounce 
				    them righteous. . . ." Is there a difference between "declaring righteous" 
				    and "pronouncing righteous"? If so, the latter occurs at the close of the 
				    earthly life of the 144,000, and is based not on faith, but on works. If not, 
				    Jehovah's Witnesses are not consistent on this point. 

				    2»« Cf. This Means Everlasting Life, pp. 120-21. 

				    -»<s Let God Be True, pp. 299-300. It will be remembered that Christ 
				    was also begotten or brought forth as a spiritual son of God at the time 
				    of his baptism. 

				    •Ml Paradise Lost, p. 152. 

				    - HH Make Sure of All Things, p. 48. This is the reason, I presume, why 
				    the other sheep do not need to be born again — they have no prospects of 
				    spirit life in heaven. 

				    2»» Let God Be True, p. 300. 

				    ""<> Paradise Lost, p. 152. 

				    am New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 307; Paradise Lost, p. 153. 

				    : «>- Let God Be True, p. 300. 

				    30:1 This Means Everlasting Life, p. 121. 



				    74 Jehovah's Witnesses 

				    ing their dependability by carrying out their dedication faithfully 
				    until death. This work of setting them apart the Scriptures speak 
				    of as "sanctification". . . , 304 

				    The anointed ones, therefore, are also sanctified; in this process 
				    both the Creator and the dedicated ones have a part. :1or ' 

				    The anointed ones must preach the good news of Christ's King- 
				    dom. If they maintain their integrity until death, they will receive 
				    immortality. God is now using these consecrated members of 
				    Christ's body to direct the work of proclaiming his Name and 
				    Kingdom. The earthly remnant of his body is known as the 
				    "faithful and discreet slave";™ 8 it is the task of this remnant to 
				    provide spiritual food for those who hunger and thirst after 
				    truth. 307 

				    As we reflect on the way of salvation for the 144,000, we re- 
				    member what was said in Paradise Lost, p. 152, about the earlier 
				    stages of this process: "This much the individual can do. The 
				    rest depends upon God." Jehovah's Witnesses teach that the 
				    selection of the 144,000 is a sovereign act on God's part. This 
				    selection, however, is made on the basis of their having met the 
				    requirements for membership in this class. ms One is chosen to 
				    belong to this group, therefore, on the basis of his worthiness. We 
				    must remember, too, that the first steps in the process which leads 
				    to salvation for this class are faith, repentance, and dedication to 
				    Christ — steps which these individuals themselves must take. It 
				    is only after they have taken these steps that God justifies, regen- 
				    erates, and sanctifies them. It should further be noted that much 
				    emphasis is laid on continued faithfulness to God. These people 
				    must "demonstrate their dependability by carrying out their dedi- 
				    cation faithfully until death."™ 9 If they turn back from this dedi- 
				    cation, such turning back "would mark them as agreement-break- 
				    ers, worthy of death, annihilation. "* w As a matter of fact, salva- 
				    tion for the Witnesses is not something which one receives when he 

				    sm Let God Be True, p. 30k 

				    805 Ibid. Strange to say, however, the passage quoted to support this 
				    point is Lev. 20:7, 8. But the anointed class (who are the only ones that 
				    will be sanctified in this sense) did not begin to be gathered until Pentecost! 
				    (see above, p. 54). 

				    :mw L e t G oc i g e True, pp. 302-303. By earthly remnant is meant the 
				    members of the anointed class who are still left on earth at any one time. 

				    a°7 Ibid., p. 132. 

				    308 See above, p. 51. 

				    *«» Let God Be True, p. 301. 

				    •'"<> Ibid., pp. 302-3. 



				    Doctrines 75 

				    becomes a Christian, but something which is not fully attained un- 
				    til one's earthly course is finished. 311 

				    Hence, though Jehovah's Witnesses claim that salvation is of 
				    grace, and that all credit for salvation belongs to Jehovah, ■ iv2 we 
				    conclude that in Watchtower theology it is not really God's sov- 
				    ereign grace that saves even the 144,000, but rather man who saves 
				    himself by grasping the ransom, by showing himself worthy of be- 
				    ing selected as a member of the anointed class, and by carrying 
				    out his dedication to Jehovah faithfully until death. Another 
				    point should here be noted. What Christ earned by his ranson, 
				    as we have seen, was a perfect human life with its rights and earthly 
				    prospects. When the anointed ones are justified, they receive 
				    this right to perfect life on earth. This right, however, they now 
				    proceed to sacrifice, as Jesus had done before them; by so doing 
				    they obtain the right to share heavenly life with Christ after 
				    death. 318 Thus they obtain the right to heavenly life, not through 
				    Christ's sacrifice (since he earned only the right to perfect life 
				    on earth), but through their own sacrifice of their earthly prospects 
				    in the Paradise of the New World. It is therefore literally True 
				    that these 144,000 earn their own way to heaven! 

				    The Other Sheep. How do the other sheep obtain salvation? 
				    They, too, need to have faith in Jehovah and in Jesus Christ; they, 
				    too, must dedicate themselves to do God's will and must faithfully 
				    carry out their dedication* 14 ; they, too, must be baptized by im- 
				    mersion as a symbol of their dedication. ' M " 

				    Note, however, the following differences between the way of 
				    salvation for the other sheep and for the anointed class: 

				    ( 1 ) The other sheep do not need to sacrifice the prospect of 
				    perfect human life in the coming earthly Paradise. 316 

				    (2) Hence God does not need to justify them — at least not 
				    during their present existence. 317 

				    • - "i Make Sure of All Things, p. 332. 

				    »'-' Ibid., p. 336. 

				    ■»« Let God Be True, pp. 299-300. Cf. This Means Everlasting Life, p. 
				    120; New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 309. 

				    a ' 4 Let God Be True, p. 298. 

				    •"»■"■ Make Sure of All Things, p. 30. 

				    hi 6 l\l e w Heavens and a New Earth, p. 309. 

				    317 The reason for the qualification is this: the Witnesses teach that there 
				    will be a justification of the other sheep at the end of the millennium. 
				    After describing how the other sheep who have been given new bodies 
				    during the millennium resist Satan's final attempt to draw them away 
				    from God, the authors of You May Survive Armageddon say: "God will be 



				    76 Jehovah's Witnesses 

				    (3) God therefore does not need to regenerate the other sheep; 
				    in fact, they cannot be born again. 318 

				    (4) Neither does God need to consecrate or anoint them to be 
				    kings and priests. 31 " 

				    (5) Neither does God need to sanctify them. 320 

				    Since the vast majority of Jehovah's Witnesses today belong to 
				    the other sheep, and since the vast majority of those who will be 
				    resurrected and saved during the millennium will belong to the 
				    other sheep as well, I conclude that, according to Watchtower 
				    teaching, most of those who are to be saved will attain this salva- 
				    tion without being regenerated, justified (in the Christian sense), 
				    anointed to office, and sanctified (in the Christian sense). 
				    This means that, without having their sinful natures renewed, this 
				    "great crowd" will be able to have faith in Christ, to dedicate 
				    their lives wholly to him, and to remain faithful to the end! This 
				    means that the vast majority of believers are not priests or kings 
				    — Jehovah's Witnesses thus deny the universal priesthood of be- 
				    lievers, one of the basic truths of the Protestant Reformation. 
				    This means, too, that the vast majority of believers are not justi- 
				    fied by faith but must earn their justification by their "unbreak- 
				    able steadfastness" during the millennium — thus the Witnesses 
				    repudiate the so-called material principle of the Reformation: 
				    justification by faith. Looking at all this, one is forced to the con- 
				    clusion that, in this theological system, man is saved not primarily 

				    vindicated as True by their unbreakable steadfastness and he will judge them 
				    worthy of the right to everlasting life in the earthly paradise. He will 
				    accordingly justify them [the other sheep], and the names of these un- 
				    changeably righteous ones will be 'written in the book of life' " (p. 360; cf. 
				    New Heavens and a New Earth, pp. 355-56; This Means Everlasting Life, 
				    p. 304). This type of "justification," however, is something quite different 
				    from that which the 144,000 are said to receive when they believe. For 
				    the justification of the 144,000 is said to be by faith, whereas that of the 
				    other sheep is a justification earned by their works. 

				    mx Make Sure of All Things, pp. 48-49. See, e.g., the discussion in 
				    This Means Everlasting Life, pp. 120-21, which makes it quite clear 
				    that only those destined for heavenly life will be begotten by God's 
				    spirit. 

				    :ii» Make Sure of All Things, p. 91: "Consecration .... applies only 
				    to Christ and the anointed, spirit-begotten members of his body." 

				    s -° You May Survive Armageddon, p. 252. Again we note the ten- 
				    dency to use theological terms in a variety of ways: "They [the other sheep] 
				    are not 'saints' or sanctified ones. . . . However, . . . they are sanctified 
				    for the warfare and must aid in keeping the camp of the theocratic 
				      warriors clean, unworldly, pleasing to God." It is clear, however, that 
				      this latter kind of sanctification is not the sanctification of which the Bible 
				      speaks. 



				      Doctrines 77 

				      by the grace of God shown to unworthy sinners, but rather by his 
				      own demonstration of his worthiness to be saved. 

				      William J. Schnell points out that during his years with the move- 
				      ment the other sheep were told that if they stayed close to the 
				      Watchtower organization, listened attentively to its indoctrination, 
				      went out regularly to distribute literature, and rigidly reported the 
				      time spent in doing so, they might be saved at Armageddon! All 
				      the emphasis, he insists, was on works, particularly on witnessing, 
				      as the way to arrive at a reasonable certainty of future salvation, 
				      rather than on faith in Jesus Christ as Saviour. 321 Kurt Hutten 
				      similarly suggests that the real core of the way of salvation for 
				      Jehovah's Witnesses is witnessing; the harder one works at his 
				      witnessing, the more prominent the role he will play in the earthly 
				      paradise to come! 322 

				      One more observation should be made. By their sharp division 
				      of believers into two classes, the Watchtower Society actually 
				      makes a large part of the Bible, particularly of the New Testa- 
				      ment, meaningless for the majority of its adherents. For all 
				      Scriptural passages dealing with regeneration, sanctification, anoint- 
				      ing, and consecration; all passages which speak of being sealed 
				      by the Spirit, filled with the Spirit, or testified to by the Spirit; 
				      all passages which describe the body of Christ, the bride of Christ, 
				      the new creation, the holy nation, and the elect (the list is far from 
				      exhaustive) are intended, so the Witnesses say, only for the 
				      anointed class and mean nothing for the other sheep. Surely 
				      this is a kind of divisive criticism of the Bible that is just as 
				      damaging to its authority and comfort as are the irreverent scissors 
				      of the higher critic! 

				      Doctrine of the Church and Sacraments 
				      doctrine of the church 
				      The attitude of Jehovah's Witnesses toward the Christian 
				      church in general is so utterly bigoted as to be almost unbelievable. 
				      They — the Witnesses — alone are God's True people; all others 
				      are followers of the devil. The "great whore" of Revelation 17, 
				      as we saw, is organized religion, Christian as well as heathen. 323 
				      The devil's organization, constantly at war against Jehovah's theo- 

				      S2 ' Op. cit., p. 104. 

				      •"■- 2 Seller, Gruebler, Entluisiasten, p. 108. 

				      !, -' :t Religion for Mankind, p. 328. 



				      78 Jehovah's Witnesses 

				      cratic organization, has two parts: an invisible section, consisting 
				      of the demons, and a visible section. The latter section includes 
				      all the political organizations of this world and all its religious sys- 
				      tems, including apostate Christendom — that is, all of Christen- 
				      dom except for the Watchtower Society and its members. 3 - 4 
				      Though the Roman Catholic Church is singled out as the False 
				      church in its worst form, :i - r ' all denominations of Christendom 
				      are included in the devil's organization/ 1 -" Organized Chris- 
				      tianity, especially from the fourth century onward, was the begin- 
				      ning of the "man of lawlessness"; the various Protestant denomi- 
				      nations have now joined with the Roman Catholic Church in 
				      "making up that great combine, the organized clergy of Christen- 
				      dom, the 'man of lawlessness.' " 327 The religious clergy, in fact, 
				      are the direct visible link between mankind and the invisible 
				      demons l :vM 

				      True religion, according to Religion for Mankind, was estab- 
				      lished in the Garden of Eden before man fell (pp. 44-47); False 
				      religion, however, was introduced by Satan when he tempted Eve 
				      (pp. 49-53). In various ways False religion and apostasy revealed 
				      itself before the flood (pp. 58-74), after the flood (pp. 74-91), 
				      and during the later history of Israel (pp. 177-190). The Babylon 
				      from which the Jewish remnant was delivered in 537 B.C. fore- 
				      shadowed the deliverance of the present-day True church, that is, 
				      the Jehovah-Witness organization, from modern Babylon, that is, 
				      the False religions of the present world, including particularly or- 
				      ganized Christendom (p. 190; cf. p. 328). Jesus Christ again 
				      introduced True religion, but very soon apostasy began once 
				      more.*-" The Council of Nicaea in a.d. 325, which defined the 
				      doctrine of the Trinity, was a great victory for apostate Christian- 
				      ity.™" Virtually the entire history of the Christian church through 
				      the ancient and medieval periods was a history of apostasy. 331 
				      Though the Reformation brought some reforms, various gross er- 
				      rors, such as the Trinity, the immortality of the soul, and hell-fire, 

				      ■•«* Ibid., p. 307. 
				      *-' n Ibid., pp. 272-77. 

				      :, -° Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, pp. 107-9. 
				      :w7 Qualified to be Ministers, pp. 288, 291. 
				      •'<- >K The Kingdom is at Hand, p. 186. 
				      : *2» Qualified to be Ministers, pp. 283-84. 

				      "■'«> The Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 281; cf. Religion for Mankind, 
				      pp. 271-72. 
				      ■'«» Qualified to be Ministers, pp. 283-291. 



				      Doctrines 79 

				      continued to be perpetuated. 832 The real restoration of the church 
				      to True religion did not take place until the 1870's when Russell 
				      began his Bible class; 333 the complete release of God's True people 
				      from "Babylonish captivity," however, did not occur until 1919. 334 

				      Basic to Jehovah-Witness ecclesiology is, once again, the distinc- 
				      tion between the anointed class and the other sheep. We shall 
				      therefore look at each of these classes in turn. 

				      The Anointed Class. This designates the "congregation of faith- 
				      ful Christians who [will] win the heavenly reward." 335 The num- 
				      ber of this group, when completed, will be 144, 000. 336 Since only 
				      the 144,000 properly belong to the church, or "congregation," as 
				      it is usually called, 337 it is clear that the True church of Jehovah 
				      will have only 144,000 members. Whenever the expression "con- 
				      gregation of God" occurs in Jehovah-Witness literature, therefore, 
				      it must be understood as referring only to the 144,000. 

				      A rather bewildering variety of names are, however, applied to 
				      this group. Among these are the following: Anointed, Body of 
				      Christ, Bride of Christ, Chosen Ones, Elect, Holy Nation, Israel 
				      of God, Kingdom Class, Little Flock, New Creation, New Nation, 
				      Royal House, Royal Priesthood, Sanctuary Class, Sons of Levi, 
				      Spirit-Begotten, Spiritual Israel, Spiritual Sons. 338 

				      The relationship of this group to the heavenly theocratic organi- 
				      zation has been previously described. 33M Because the heavenly 
				      theocratic organization is "God's woman" or "wife," and because 
				      the members of the anointed class are children of this woman, they 
				      can properly be said to be children of God. The anointed class 

				      •«2 Ibid., p. 292. 

				      333 ibid., p. 296. 

				      3^4 ibid., p. 297. See references to this date in various Watchtower 
				      publications. The implication of all this is obvious: anyone who does 
				      not join the Jehovah-Witness organization today but remains in a Christian 
				      church is a devotee of False religion. 

				      33."> Your Will Be Done, p. 15. 

				      336 See above, p. 51. 

				      ?,3" "Scripturally 'church' means a congregation called out from the 
				      world for God's purpose; and so the New World Translation renders the 
				      Greek Word ekklesia by the English word 'congregation' " (Lei God Be 
				      True, p. 125). 

				      33H Watch Tower Publications Index of Subjects Discussed and Scrip- 
				      tures Explained, 1930-1960 (Pub. in 1961), p. 64. Note that the term 
				      "elect" is applied only to the 144,000. It will be remembered that the 
				      living members of this group existing on earth at any time are called the 
				      "remnant." 

				      339 See above, p. 54. It will be remembered that the anointed class began 
				      to be gathered at Pentecost. 



				      80 Jehovah's Witnesses 

				      is the earthly counterpart of Jehovah's heavenly theocratic or- 
				      ganization, and hence plays a leading role in directing the activi- 
				      ties of the Watchtower Society. 

				      As will be described more fully under the Doctrine of the 
				      Last Things, the anointed class is destined to spend eternity in 
				      heaven with Christ; they will not live in the Paradise of the new 
				      earth. 

				      The Other Sheep. Charles T. Russell had already distinguished 
				      between two classes of spirit-begotten people: A higher class, 
				      which he called class n, the members of which will be the Bride 
				      of Christ, the "little flock," and will sit with the Lord in his throne 
				      in glory; and a lower class, which he called class m, who shrink 
				      from the death of the human will and therefore will not sit with 
				      the Lord in his throne of glory, but will finally reach birth as spirit 
				      beings of an order lower than the divine nature. This latter group 
				      Russell called, in fact, the "Great Company," a name very similar 
				      to one of the names given the "other sheep" class today: "the 
				      great crowd."* 4 " There are important differences, however, be- 
				      tween these two classes as described by Russell and the two classes 
				      distinguished by Jehovah's Witnesses today. For Russell both of 
				      these classes were spirit-begotten; for Jehovah's Witnesses, how- 
				      ever, the other sheep, or lower class, cannot be spirit-begotten. 
				      Russell taught that the members of the m class would eventually 
				      become spirit beings, whereas the Witnesses say that the other 
				      sheep will never become spirit beings. If Russell was once con- 
				      sidered the mouthpiece of God, he is obviously no longer consid- 
				      ered such by present-day Jehovah's Witnesses. 341 

				      Russell had also taught that at the end of the "time of harvest" 
				      in 1918 the door to immortality would be closed since every place 
				      in the bride class would be taken. 842 Because large numbers came 
				      into the movement after that date, however, Jehovah's Witnesses 
				      began to gather in addition to the anointed class another group, 

				      ; ^ 4n Studies in the Scripture, Series I, The Plan of the Ages (orig. 
				      pub. 1886; this ed. pub. in Allegheny, Pa., in 1907), pp. 235-36, 240. 

				      w At this point a significant question arises: If Russell's teachings on a 
				      matter like the above can be so changed, what right do Jehovah's Witnesses 
				      have to follow him as slavishly as they do on other points? (see Martin 
				      and Klann, op. cit., pp. 37-41). Suppose he were wrong on other matters 
				      as well! 

				      M' 2 Op cit., Series III, Thy Kingdom Come (orig. pub. 1891; this ed. 
				      pub. in Allegheny, Pa., in 1907), pp. 205-23; cf. Kurt. Hutten, Seher, 
				      Gruebler, Enthusiasten, p. 104. 



				      Doctrines 8 1 

				      called "other sheep," in 1931. :u:l In 1936, it is said, the Watch- 
				      tower Society received clear Scriptural evidence that this "other 
				      sheep" class was destined to live on earth after Armageddon. 344 

				      As was the case with the anointed class, various names have 
				      been given to this second class of believers. The name "great 
				      multitude" or "great crowd" is derived from Revelation 7:9, 
				      where, so it is alleged, this group is distinguished from the 144,000 
				      mentioned in the fourth verse of the chapter. 845 The name "other 
				      sheep" is derived from John 10:16, where Jesus is recorded as 
				      saying, "other sheep I have, which are not of this fold." 348 An- 
				      other common name for this group is "Jonadabs," a name derived 
				      from II Kings 10:15-28, and Jeremiah 35. Jonadab (or Jehona- 
				      dab), a son of Rechab, was the head of a Kenite tribe which 
				      dwelt among the Israelites. Jehu took Jonadab along with him 
				      and used his help in suppressing Baal worship in Samaria. Jona- 
				      dab was thus a person who was not an Israelite, but who assisted 
				      in the work of an Israelite king. 347 Comparably, Jonadabs today 
				      are not regarded as brethren in Christ, but nevertheless may be 
				      spared from the destruction of Armageddon if they work along 
				      with the anointed class. 

				      Jehovah's Witnesses display a fantastic kind of exegetical inge- 
				      nuity in finding Biblical symbols or types for the "other sheep" 
				      class. In You May Survive Armageddon, for example, the other 
				      sheep are said to be pictured by the famine-stricken Egyptians 
				      (pp. 328-29), the foreigners of David's army (pp. 251-52), the 
				      Gibeonites (pp. 241-44), Jephthah's daughter (pp. 323-25), 
				      Joseph's ten half-brothers (pp. 327-28), the mariners with Jonah 
				      (pp. 149-150), the mixed company that left Egypt (pp. 122-25), 
				      the Nethinim, non-Israelites who became temple slaves (pp. 142- 
				      48), Noah's sons and daughters-in-law (pp. 290-93), the prodi- 
				      gal son (p. 363), and Rebekah's nurse (pp. 224, 226, 229. Pp. 
				      367-68 of this volume, in fact, list 42 Biblical types of the other 
				      sheep! ) . 

				      The other sheep whom Christ is gathering now are, however, 
				      just the beginning of this group. The vast majority of these other 
				      sheep will be gathered during the millennium, when most of those 

				      :!4:! Jehovah's Witnesses- in the Divine Purpose, p. 139; New Heavens and 
				      a New Earth, p. 308; Paradise Lost, p. 195. 
				      »44 Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, p. 140. 
				      S4B You May Survive Armageddon, p. 180. 
				      ; »« Ibid., p. 68; Let God Be True, p. 231. 
				      :iA ~ You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 276-81; Let God Be True, p. 231. 



				      82 Jehovah's Witnesses 

				      in the grave will be raised. 348 During Christ's thousand-year reign 
				      the other sheep become "the earthly children of the Lifegiver 
				      Jesus Christ and hence are technically in the position of being 
				      'grandchildren' of God." a4H 

				      As will be set forth more fully under the Doctrine of the 
				      Last Things, the other sheep will not get to heaven after death, 
				      but will be raised with physical bodies and will, if they pass the 
				      necessary tests, spend eternity in the Paradise of the new earth. 

				      Reflecting upon Jehovah-Witness ecclesiology, we observe that, 
				      whereas the Scriptures say that there is one body and that we have 
				      been called to one hope of our calling (Ephesians 4:4), Jehovah's 
				      Witnesses have split the church 830 into two bodies, with two sep- 
				      arate and distinct hopes for the future. Whereas the Scriptures 
				      say, "You are all, in fact, sons of God through your faith in 
				      Christ Jesus" (Gal. 3:26, NWT), the Witnesses say, Among 
				      those who believe, some are sons of God, but others are grandsons 
				      of God. Whereas the Scriptures say, of those who are in Christ, 
				      "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor freeman, 
				      there is neither male nor female; for you are all one [person] in 
				      union with Christ Jesus (Galatians 3:28, NWT), the Watchtower 
				      says, There is, however, a most important distinction among the 
				      people of God which Paul here has forgotten to mention : that be- 
				      tween the anointed class and the other sheep. Whereas the Scrip- 
				      tures say, in Revelation 21:2, that the holy city comes down out 
				      of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband 
				      (implying that this bride will be on the new earth thereafter, so 
				      that heaven and earth now become one), Jehovah's Witnesses, in 
				      defiance of Scripture, wish to keep the bride of Christ in heaven 
				      throughout eternity, and to leave the lower class of adherents on 
				      earth. Whereas the Scriptures say that Jesus Christ gave himself 
				      for us that he might "cleanse for himself a people peculiarly his 
					own, zealous for fine works" (Titus 2:14, NWT), Watchtower 
					teachers say that Christ really came to cleanse for himself not one 
					people, but two peoples, and that these two peoples shall remain 

					' Mh You May Survive Armageddon, p. 168. 

					S4S Let God Be True, p. 163. This would imply that the other sheep 
					are not children of God, but only grandchildren. Inconsistently, however, 
					Watchtower authors say elsewhere that the other sheep will remain 
					forever on the new earth as "the justified human sons of Jehovah God" 
					(New Heaven and a New Earth, p. 356). 

					xr >" It is granted that, according to Watchtower teaching, on!y the 144,000 
					constitute the church. But surely this kind of terminological jugglery does 
					not justify their chopping the people of God into two severed fragments! 



					Doctrines 8 3 

					forever separate. I conclude that the ecclesiology of the Jehovah's 
					Witnesses is a perversion of Scriptural teaching about the church. 

					DOCTRINE OF THE SACRAMENTS 

					Baptism. Baptism by immersion is required of all converts. 8 "' 1 
					Any male Jehovah's Witness may perform this rite. 352 Conven- 
					tions and assemblies of the Witnesses are usually occasions for 
					mass baptisms. Candidates must be baptized "in the name of the 
					Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit." This means that 
					the person to be baptized must recognize Jehovah as Supreme, 
					must recognize the part the Son performs in Jehovah's purpose, 
					and must recognize the holy spirit as God's active force which 
					will help him carry out his dedication. S5S 

					What is the significance of baptism? Baptism is defined in 
					Make Sure of All Things as "an outward symbol, as a testimony 
					before witnesses, of the baptized one's complete, unreserved and 
					unconditional dedication and agreement to do the will of Jehovah 
					God. . ." (p. 27). Immersion is essential to the symbolism: "The 
					being dipped under water pictures the death of one's past course. 
					The being lifted out of it pictures being raised and made alive 
					to the doing of God's will." 354 Infant baptism is said to be un- 
					scriptural since repentance and faith must precede baptism. 355 
					Though the children of Jehovah's Witnesses are therefore not to 
					be baptized in infancy, they must yet be treated by their parents 
					as "something 'holy' to God." 358 

					For all those who submit to this rite, baptism is a symbol of one's 
					dedication to be God's minister. 357 This would therefore be True 
					for both the anointed class and the other sheep. The other sheep, 
					  however, enjoy, in addition to their water baptism, a baptism into 
					  the Greater Noah. 358 This baptism means that they will be en- 

					  w Let God Be True, p. 297; cf. New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 301; 
					  Make Sure of All Things, p. 30. 

					  S5 - The Kingdom is At Hand, p. 296. 

					  ■™ Let God Be True, pp. 297-98. 

					  35-* Ibid., p. 297. 

					  «n- r > Make Sure of All Things, pp. 32, 30. 

					  358 This Means Everlasting Life, p. 256. The Scripture reference given 
					  here is I Cor. 7: 14. 

					  357 Make Sure of All Things, p. 265. It will be remembered that every 
					  active Witness is called a minister, even though he does not devote full 
					  time to his witnessing. 

					  ass N ew Heavens and a New Earth, p. 309. Baptism into the Greater 
					  Noah is described on p. 293 of You May Survive Armageddon as baptism 
					  into Jesus Christ. 



					  84 Jehovah's Witnesses 

					  abled to survive Armageddon, provided they remain loyal to 
					  God. 359 

					  For the anointed class, moreover, there is also a baptism addi- 
					  tional to their water baptism. This is "another baptism which no 
					  human being on earth can administer. This is the baptism of the 
					  holy spirit, which Christ Jesus administers as Jehovah's Serv- 
					  ant." 380 This baptism of the holy spirit (sometimes called a 
					  baptism with the holy spirit) indicates that the person has been 
					  baptized into the body of Christ, and that he has been baptized 
					  into Christ's death. 361 This baptism into Christ's death means 
					  baptism into a kind of death that parts with all prospect of perfect 
					  human life in the new world. 382 

					  The other sheep, however, do not receive this baptism of or with 
					  the holy spirit, though "they do enjoy a measure of God's spirit." 383 
					  They are not members of Christ's body, and are not baptized into 
					  Christ's death. They do not inherit God's kingdom, 364 or become 
					  part of it, 385 and they can only be the subjects of the kingdom of 
					  God, 386 over whom Christ and the 144,000 will rule eternally. 

					  The Lord's Supper. Jehovah's Witnesses celebrate the Lord's 
					  Supper once a year, after sundown on the "exact day of the year 
					  that he [Christ] died, the True Passover date of the Jews. This 
					  would be Abib or Nisan 14." 367 This date usually occurs within 
					  what we call passion week; yet it may fall on any day of the 
					  week. 38 * 

					  Though at first the Bible Students called this meal the "Anni- 
					  versary Supper," today Witnesses call it the "Memorial." 380 At this 
					  Memorial unleavened bread and fermented wine are served. 37 " 
					  Jehovah's Witnesses reject transubstantiation (the view that the 
					  bread and wine change into the actual body and blood of Christ), 
					  maintaining that the loaf of bread merely symbolizes Jesus' fleshly 
					  body and that the cup of wine symbolizes Jesus' blood. 371 

					  35!) /v<?vf Heavens and a New Earth, p. 311. 

					  :wo j ne Kingdom is at Hand, p. 296. 

					  *''>' Ibid., pp. 296-98. 

					  36i> New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 309. 

					  303 \ bid _ 

					  so* Let God Be True, p. 138. 

					  385 Ibid., p. 136. 

					  •' te(i Ibid., pp. 138-39; This Means Everlasting Life, p. 275. 

					  :I8T Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, p. 24. 

					  ;i8 » Make Sure of AH Things, p. 169. 

					  :!«(> Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, p. 24. 

					  ST " Your Will Be Done, p. 155; Make Sure of All Tilings, p. 260. 

					  ■"I Make Sure of All Things, p. 257. 



					  Doctrines 85 

					  When we look at the purpose of the Memorial, it becomes quite 
					  clear that it is intended for the 144,000 only. Its purpose, accord- 
					  ing to Make Sure of All Things, is to help the communicant re- 
					  member Jesus' sacrifice (p. 260), whereby the forgiveness of sins 
					  has been obtained (pp. 261-62), and whereby a way has been 
					  opened for him and for his fellow anointed ones to go to heaven 
					  (p. 261). The communicant remembers that Jesus' blood put 
					  into force a new covenant between Jehovah and the 144,000 
					  (p. 261), and thus exercises partnership with his fellow com- 
					  municants and with Jehovah and Christ Jesus (p. 262). 

					  It is specifically taught that Jesus "set up this evening meal 
					  with those who were to be taken into the covenant for the 
					  Kingdom." 372 A few lines farther along we read that the " 'other 
					  sheep' have personal Scriptural evidence that they are not in that 
					  Kingdom covenant." 373 In other words, the Memorial was in- 
					  tended by Christ to be celebrated by the 144,000 only! The only 
					  semblance of Scripture proof given for this limitation of the 
					  Memorial to the anointed class is the quotation of Luke 22:28-30 
					  in the New World Translation, according to which Jesus makes 
					  a covenant with his disciples for a Kingdom. In utterly arbitrary 
					  fashion, the authors proceed to assert dogmatically that the other 
					  sheep have no part in this "Kingdom covenant." Thus Jehovah's 
					  Witnesses prohibit the vast majority of their adherents from par- 
					  taking of a sacrament which Christ appointed for all His people. 

					  Though the other sheep may not partake of the elements, they 
					  are instructed to attend the Memorial annually and to observe its 
					  celebration. 374 Thus the number of partakers of the Memorial is 
					  always a very small portion of those who attend. In 1971, for 
					  example, though there was a world-wide Memorial attendance of 
					  3,453,542, only 10,384 partook of the meal. 375 

					  Doctrine of the Last Things 

					  individual eschatology 

					  The Slate of Man After Death. It has been shown above that 

					  Jehovah's Witnesses deny the immortality of the soul, define soul 

					  as a living person, and say that man does not possess a soul but 

					  ■ 1? - Your Will Be Done, p. 156. 

					  37:1 Ibid. We are noi told what this "personal Scriptural evidence" 
					  is. 
					  874 Make Sure of All Things, p. 263. 
					  :i75 Watclitower, Jan. 1, 1972, p. 25. 



					  86 Jehovah's Witnesses 

					  is a soul. 376 It will be obvious, therefore, that they disavow any 
					  conscious existence of the soul after death. Let us look into this 
					  matter a bit more in detail; 

					  This disavowal is explicitly stated in a booklet published in 1955 
					  entitled What Do the Scriptures Say about "Survival After Death"? 
					  On page 26 of this booklet they affirm that the human soul cannot 
					  exist apart from the human body. The human soul, therefore, 
					  is not immortal but mortal; a number of Scripture passages are 
					  cited in proof of this point (pp. 35-43). It is further contended 
					  that, since there is no sense in which any aspect of man continues 
					  to exist consciously after death, "in this respect mankind, because 
					  of the condemnation to death that they inherited from Adam, 
					  are like the lower animals that die. . ." (p. 31). S7T 

					  The Meaning of Sheol and Hades. In this connection we should 
					  note what Jehovah's Witnesses teach about such Biblical words as 
					  Sheol and Hades. The Hebrew word Sheol, rendered hell, grave, 
					  or pit in the King James Version, means "mankind's common 
					  grave or the pit of burial"; it is emphatically denied that the word 
					  Sheol can ever mean "a fiery place of torture or a place of two 
					  compartments, one of bliss and one of fiery torment.""* A num- 
					  ber of Scripture passages are adduced to support this contention. 379 
					  It is further asserted that Hades, the Greek equivalent of Sheol, 
					  also means "mankind's common grave. " SK0 Since the Bible teaches 
					  that after death man goes to either Sheol or Hades, and since both 
					  of these words simply mean grave, the Scriptures, so it is claimed, 
					  do not teach that there is any immaterial aspect of man which sur- 
					    vives after death. When man dies, he totally ceases to exist. 

					    Conditional Immortality. It must not be inferred from the 

					    376 See above, pp. 55-57. 

					    :i77 The similarity between this view of the state after death and that 
					    of the Seventh-day Adventists is quite apparent. Note that, as in the case 
					    of Seventh-day Adventist teaching, the Jehovah-Witness position on the 
					    state after death cannot properly be described as soul-sleep, since, according 
					    to them, there is no soul that sleeps after death. The soul simply ceases 
					    to exist after death; hence their view, like that of the Adventists, can 
					    more accurately be described as soid-exlinction. 

					    •« 8 Let God Be True, pp. 89-90. 

					    ■ i ~ i > Ibid., pp. 90-92. The Witnesses are not wholly consistent on this 
					    point, however. For on pp. 93-94 we are told that the hell pictured in 
					    Isa. 14:9, into which the king of Babylon — who stands for Satan — 
					    is said to descend, is the abyss into which Satan is cast at the beginning 
					    of the millennium (Rev. 20:1-3). The word here translated hell is, 
					    however, Sheol. In this instance Sheol obviously does not mean grave, 
					    since the devil has no body which can be cast into a grave. 

					    »»° Ibid., p. 93. 



					    Doctrines 87 

					    above description of the state of man after death, however, that, 
					    according to Watchtower teaching, death is the final end for every 
					    human being. The Witnesses do indeed maintain that this is so 
					    for certain men, as will be shown later. But they also affirm that 
					      for most members of the human race some type of existence after 
						death is to be expected. This type of existence, however, is not a 
						continued subsistence, either in conscious or unconscious fashion, 
						of the soul, but will take the form of some kind of resurrection. 
						This resurrection may occur in either a physical or a non-physical 
						way. The members of the anointed class have been or will be 
						"resurrected" as spirits with "bodies" that are spiritual but not 
						in any sense physical. The members of the other sheep, however, 
						as well as the vast majority of the rest of mankind, will be raised 
						with physical bodies during the millennium. 381 

						We thus observe that Jehovah's Witnesses, while denying the in- 
						herent immortality of the human soul, do teach a kind of condi- 
						tional immortality. Conditional immortality may be defined as 
						the view that holds that, though man is inherently mortal, im- 
						mortality is conferred on certain members of the human race as a 
						divine gift. The Witnesses teach that immortality belongs primarily 
						and originally to Jehovah. :w - Immortality in a secondary sense 
						(not inherent but bestowed immortality), however, is given only 
						to Christ and to the members of the anointed class: 

						Christ Jesus was first to receive immortality as a reward for his 
						faithful course on earth, and it [immortality] is now also given in 
						reward to those who are of the True congregation or "body of 
						Christ." Immortality is a reward for faithfulness. 383 

						This does not mean, however, that all other human beings be- 
						sides the anointed class will finally be annihilated. The other 
						sheep and the majority of the rest of mankind will be raised with 
						physical bodies; after they shall have passed the tests to which 
						they must submit during the millennium, they will be granted ever- 
						lasting life. But this everlasting life should be distinguished from 
						immortality, which is bestowed only on the anointed class. 384 For 
						Jehovah's Witnesses, to receive immortality, therefore, means to 

						am These teachings will be examined in greater detail and carefully 
						documented later in this chapter. 

						kx- Make Sure of All Things, p. 349. 

						»*» Lei God Be True, p. 74. Cf. Make Sure of All Things, pp. 136, 
						350, 246, 247. 

						■ Wi Make Sure of Alt Things, pp. 248, 243. Cf. Let God Be True, p. 75. 



						88 Jehovah's Witnesses 

						be "raised" without a physical body; everlasting life in a physical 
						body is not considered equivalent to immortality. 385 

						In summary, we may say that, according to Watchtower teach- 
						ing, one of four possible destinies awaits a person when he dies: 
						(1) he may remain in the condition of nonexistence into which 
						death has plunged him: (2) he may be "raised" with a "spirit 
						body," thus receiving immortality, after which he will go directly 
						to heaven to reign there with Christ; (3) he may be raised with a 
						physical body and then, after having passed the millennial tests, 
						receive everlasting life on the renewed earth; or (4) he may, after 
						having been raised with a physical body, still fail to pass the mil- 
						lennial tests, and thus eventually be annihilated. 386 

						GENERAL ESCHATOLOGY 

						The Kingdom of God. In order to understand Jehovah-Witness 
						teaching about the so-called "second presence" of Christ, we must 
						first examine their doctrine of the kingdom of God. Here, too, we 
						shall find the Witnesses differing sharply from evangelical Chris- 
						tians. Let us look first at a rather comprehensive definition of the 
						kingdom of God: 

						The Kingdom of God is a Sovereign-empowered theocratic 
						government under an administration of divinely appointed Kings. 
						Jehovah himself is the great Everlasting King. ... He has taken 
						into association as co-regent his Son Christ Jesus. God has pur- 
						posed the Kingdom as the capital or ruling part of his universal 
						organization. It is comprised of the King Christ Jesus and 
						144,000 associate kings taken from among men. It is entirely 
						heavenly, having no earthly part. All becoming members must 
						be resurrected and given spirit bodies. asT 

						From this definition we learn that, though Jehovah is the King 
						of this kingdom, Jesus Christ is His co-regent and that this king- 
						dom is^the "ruling part" of Jehovah's organization. It is also quite 
						clear from this statement that only the 144,000 belong to this 

						385 Cf . what was said on p. 57 above about the everlasting life Adam would 
						have attained if he had not sinned. Quite inconsistent with this position, how- 
						ever, is the denial of the immortality of the angels, who, like the glorified 
						members of the anointed class, do not have physical bodies (see above, 
						pp. 57-58). 

						3S 8 See Appendix E in The Four Major Cults for a critical evaluation of 
						Jehovah- Witness teaching on soul-extinction, conditional immortality, and the 
						annihilation of the wicked. 

						3" Make Sure of All Things, p. 226. 



						Doctrines 89 

						kingdom. Even the 1 44,000, however, do not belong to the king- 
						dom until after their "resurrection" with spirit bodies. The king- 
						dom of God, therefore, is in no sense earthly; it is exclusively a 
						heavenly kingdom. 388 

						When we now ask Jehovah's Witnesses when this heavenly king- 
						dom was established, we get the following kind of answer: God 
						foretold the coming of this kingdom in Old Testament times, the 
						first of these prophecies being Genesis 3:15 . 38ft During the history 
						of Israel, God set up a theocracy, in which He Himself was the 
						ruler of His people; this, however, was not the kingdom promised 
						in Eden, but only a picture or type of the greater kingdom that 
						was to come. 390 When Christ came he proclaimed that the king- 
						dom of God had drawn near; this, however, did not mean that the 
						kingdom had actually been established, but only that the anointed 
						king was now personally in the midst of the people of Israel. 3B1 
						Though the disciples also proclaimed the presence of the kingdom 
						in this sense at the time when Christ was upon earth, "there is no 
						record that they continued to do so after his [Jesus'] ascension 
						on high," since "such an announcement would not be appropriate 
						until his return and second presence. " SS2 Christ, therefore, did not 
						establish the kingdom of God at the time of his first advent. 
						Neither did he establish this kingdom at once after he had ascend- 

						388 fhe kingdom of God, therefore, for the Witnesses, does not designate a 
						group of people on earth — this despite the fact that they name their 
						places of worship "Kingdom Halls." It is specifically stated that "all 
						selected for the kingdom must die in order to enter it" (ibid., p. 235). 
						Though the kingdom of God is a heavenly organization, this kingdom 
						does have earthly subjects: the other sheep (Let God Be True, p. 139; 
						This Means Everlasting Life, p. 275). Since only the 144,000 are mem- 
						bers of the kingdom, the other sheep are subjects but not members. Even 
						the angelic hosts who serve as faithful messengers of the king are not 
						members of this kingdom but only subjects (Let God Be True, p. 138). 

						as* Let God Be True, p. 134. 

						»»o Ibid., p. 135. 

						• sin Ibid., p. 140. In this connection Lk. 17:21 is quoted: "Look, the 
						kingdom of God is in your midst" (NWT). The Witnesses evade the 
						clear teaching of this passage — that the kingdom of God had then 
						already been established — by contending that these words only mean 
						that the King of the kingdom was then in the midst of the Pharisees (cf. 
						also The Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 299). 

						3B2 Let God Be True, p. 140. But how would Jehovah's Witnesses 
						interpret Acts 8:12, where Philip's preaching to the Samaritans is 
						described as "preaching good tidings concerning the kingdom of God"; 
						or Acts 19:8, where Paul is said to have taught in the synagogue 
						at Ephesus for three months, "reasoning and persuading as to the things 
						concerning the kingdom of God"? 



						90 Jehovah's Witnesses 

						ed into heaven; his ascension was only the beginning of a long 
						period of waiting for the establishment of the kingdom of God. 393 

						When, then, was the kingdom of God actually established? 
						In the year a.d. 1914. We have previously noted the fantastic 
						calculations whereby the Witnesses have arrived at this date. 384 
						On October 1 of the year 1914, it is contended, the "appointed 
						times of the nations" ended, and God's heavenly kingdom, with 
						Christ enthroned as king, began. 395 It can therefore now properly 
						be said that the kingdom of God is here. 390 Since the kingdom of 
						God is here, we are now living in the "time of the end" — a period 
						which began in 1914 and will end when the devil's world is 
						destroyed in the Battle of Armageddon. 397 

						The "Return" of Jesus Christ. Since Jehovah's Witnesses identi- 
						fy the establishment of the kingdom of God with the "return" of 
						Jesus Christ, we next turn our attention to this "return." I have 
						put quotation marks around the word return for two reasons: (1) 
						This so-called "return" of Christ was neither a physical nor a 
						visible one, since Christ after his resurrection has no physical 
						body 39 *; and (2) this was not really a "return" at all, since Christ 
						did not go back to earth but simply began to rule over his kingdom 
						from heaven. 399 Thus there is actually no resemblance whatever 
						between Jehovah-Witness teaching on the "return" of Christ and 
						evangelical Protestant teaching about Christ's Second Coming. 4U " 

						To understand better what the Witnesses mean by Christ's "re- 
						turn," let us compare two statements from their writings. The 

						393 The Truth Shall make you Free, p. 241; Let God Be True, p. 140; 
						Make Sure of All Things, p. 234. See also New Heavens and a New 
						Earth, pp. 315, 317; and This Means Everlasting Life, p. 220. 

						394 See above, pp. 41-43. 

						395 Paradise Lost, pp. 173-74. Cf. You May Survive Armageddon, p. 
						100; Let God Be True, p. 141. 

						398 Let God Be True, p. 141. 

						397 Paradise Lost, pp. 178, 203. Further details about the nature and 
						functioning of this kingdom will be given as we go along. 

						398 Let God Be True, pp. 198-99; Make Sure of All Things, p. 321. 

						3!)ii Paradise Lost, pp. 173-74; New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 317. 

						4»i) Watchtower publications usually prefer the designation "second pres- 
						ence" (using the word presence as a translation of the Greek word 
						parousia), but they occasionally speak of Christ's return (Let God Be True, 
						p. 198; Make Sure of All Things, p. 319), If, however, Christ was 
						already in heaven prior to 1914, and if in 1914 he simply assumed a 
						throne in heaven, how can this action possibly be called a return'! The 
						word return is used meaningfully when a return to earth is thought of, but 
						it has no intelligible meaning when it is used to describe the Jehovah- 
						Witness conception of the "second presence" of Christ. 



						Doctrines 91 

						first, from This Means Everlasting Life, p. 220, reads: "When he 
						[Christ] ascended to heaven he sat down at God's right hand to 
						wait for that time of entering into his authority and ruling like 
						Melchizedek over his enemies as his footstool." The second is 
						from You May Survive Armageddon, p. 100: ". . . Jehovah the 
						heavenly Father brought forth his kingdom by bringing forth 
						his anointed King-Priest Jesus Christ and elevating him to the 
						active kingship in the throne at God's right hand." Putting 
						these two statements together, we learn that from the time of his 
						ascension to October 1, 1914 (when the kingdom was brought 
						forth), Christ was sitting at the right hand of God the Father, and 
						that on October 1, 1914, the Father placed the Son on the throne 
						at His right hand. Thus the "return" or "second presence" of 
						Christ simply means that Christ, who had been sitting at the 
						Father's right hand in heaven since his ascension, now ascends 
						the throne of his kingdom at the Father's right hand in heaven. 
						The "return" of Christ is, for Jehovah's Witnesses, an exclusively 
						heavenly transaction, consisting merely in Christ's exchanging an 
						"ordinary" 401 seat at the Father's right hand for a throne. Watch- 
						tower teachings on this point, therefore, not only deny Christ's 
						physical and visible return to earth, but also imply that Christ did 
						not exercise His kingly office prior to 1914. 

						According to Jehovah-Witness teaching, therefore, we need no 
						longer look for Christ's "return" or "second presence," because 
						this "return" has already taken place. Christ "became King of 
						the earth at the time of his second presence, a.d. 1914." 402 

						This "second presence" of Christ, however, was also the oc- 
						casion for an upheaval in the demonic world. Jehovah's Witnesses 
						see in Revelation 12:1-9 a description of events which occurred at 
						the time of this "second presence." The birth of the man-child 
						depicted in verse 5 symbolically pictures the birth of the heavenly 
						kingdom and the placing of Christ on the throne of this kingdom. 403 

						401 By w hat stretch of the imagination, however, can Jehovah's Witnesses 
						interpret the Biblical phrase "sitting at the right hand of God" as designating 
						anything less than Christ's kingly reign from heaven? See I Pet. 3:22 
						and Eph. 1:20-23. 

						4»2 Make Sure of All Things, p. 234. It should be noted that on this 
						point present-day Jehovah's Witnesses are not True to the teachings of 
						Russell who, as we have seen, taught that Christ's second presence began 
						in the fall of 1874 (see above, p. 11). If Russell could be wrong about this 
						crucial matter, how can the Witnesses be so sure that their present leaders 
						are right about the new date? 

						411:1 New Heavens and a New Earth, pp. 209-10. 



						92 Jehovah's Witnesses 

						The dragon's attempt to devour the man-child pictures the devil's 
						unsuccessful endeavor to destroy the newborn government. 404 
						Since, for the Witnesses, Michael is another name for Christ in 
						his glorified state, the war which is next described, between Michael 
						and his angels on the one hand and the dragon and his angels on 
						the other, is simply a dramatic picture of a great battle between 
						Christ and the devil. 405 As a result of this great battle, the devil 
						was hurled out of heaven and was cast down to the earth (v. 

						9) 406 

						After Satan had been hurled out of heaven, however, he pro- 
						ceeded to vent his rage upon the peoples of the earth. 

						Furious at the successful birth of the theocratic government, 
						Satan determined to destroy all people ere they learned of the 
						newly established kingdom. This was why he plunged the na- 
						tions into the war of 1914-1918. It was the first time in history 
						that so great a conflict had taken place. 407 

						Driving home their point, the authors of Let God Be True go on 
						to say : "It [the beginning of World War I] is conclusive proof that 
						the 'appointed times' have ended, Satan's rule is interfered with, 
						and the enthronement of Christ Jesus has taken place." 408 

						Christ's Coming to His Temple. Though at the time when 
						Christ became king of the heavenly kingdom of God in 1914 he 
						ruled alone, it was not his intention to continue ruling as a 
						solitary monarch. "... Men and women from upon the earth 
						have been raised out of death to heavenly life to rule with him." 409 
						The number of the members of this group, we are further told, is 
						to be 144,000; thus we know that those who either have or will 
						have the privilege of ruling with Christ in this sense are the 
						members of the anointed class. This group, however, did not 
						begin to reign with Christ in heaven at the moment when the 
						kingship was bestowed upon him, but a few years later. 410 

						In explaining when the members of the anointed class did begin 

						■"'■» Let God Be True, p. 202. 

						40ri Paradise Lost, p. 176. 

						4«e Ibid. 

						4»t Let God Be True, p. 254. 

						40 * Ibid. It takes a bit of imagination to understand how the beginning 
						of the worst war in history, fought largely by non-Jews, can be construed 
						as proof that the "appointed times of the nations" — times during which 
						Gentile nations would dominate the earth (see above, p. 41) — have ended, 
						that Satan's rule has been interfered with, and that Christ's enthronement 
						has now taken place! 

						4(,s > Paradise Lost, p. 213. 

						4 "' Ibid. 



						Doctrines 93 

						to reign with Christ, the authors of Paradise Lost point to a 
						parallel between Christ's first presence on earth and his "second 
						presence." Christ was anointed with God's spirit — it is said — 
						during his first presence in a.d. 29; three and a half years after 
						this he cleansed the temple at Jerusalem; six days after this 
						he arose from the dead. A similar time period, we are further 
						told, is found during Jesus' "second presence." In the fall of 
						1914 he was crowned as king; three and a half years after that 
						he cleansed Jehovah's spiritual temple; a very short time after 
						the temple's cleansing, still in the year 1918, the heavenly- 
						resurrection of certain Christians occurred, and these then began 
						to live and reign with Christ in heaven. 411 

						Examining this matter in somewhat greater detail, we ask what 
						Jehovah's Witnesses mean by the spiritual temple which Christ is 
						supposed to have cleansed in 1918. This spiritual temple is 
						understood to have been the Jehovah- Witness earthly organization, 
						for we are told that during this year "Christians who had selfish 
						  hearts and wrong ideas toward his [Christ's] service dropped out 
						  of his organization." 41 - 

						  A short time after this cleansing of the spiritual temple, the 
						  members of the anointed class who had died by that time were 
						  "raised" with spiritual (that is, non-physical) bodies, and were 
						  placed on the throne with Jesus Christ. 4 ™ At another place it is 
						  said that these risen ones were now "put in their places in the 
						  heavenly temple" 414 ; from these words it appears that there is a 
						  temple in heaven corresponding to the earthly spiritual temple 
						  which Christ had just cleansed, and that the "raised" members of 
						  the anointed class are now in this heavenly temple — or, perhaps, 
						  constitute this temple. 4 ' B 

						  in Ibid. 

						  ■*i 2 Ibid. See Qualified to be Ministers, pp. 313-14, where it is made 
						  clear that Jesus' coming to his temple for judgment in the spring of 
						  1918 resulted in the separation of the "faithful and discreet slave" class 
						  from the "evil slave" group. The latter group, it is added, then sub- 
						  divided and left the movement (see also Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine 
						  Purpose, pp. 70-73). The above, in other words, is the official Jehovah- 
						  Witness explanation for the formation of certain schismatic groups in the 
						  year 1918 (see above, p. 15). 

						  413 Parodist Lost, p. 213; New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 319. 

						  414 You May Survive Armageddon, p. 117. 

						  4 i r » There is a great deal of ambiguity in Jehovah-Witness writing about 
						  this heavenly temple. Often one gets the impression that this heavenly 
						  temple is simply another name for the 144,000 after they have been 
						  translated to heaven, and that this temple will only be completed after 
						  the last of the 144,000 have been "raised" from the dead: "Jehovah's 



						  94 Jehovah's Witnesses 

						  The Witnesses thus try to show that prophecy was fulfilled in 
						  1918 as well as in 1914. Which prophecy? The prophecy of 
						  Malachi 3:1, "And suddenly there will come to his temple the 
						  [True] Lord, whom you people are seeking, and the messenger 
						  of the covenant in whom you are delighting" (NWT) . There was, 
						  so they say, an "initial" or "miniature" fulfillment of this prophecy, 
						  and a final fulfillment. The initial fulfillment occurred when Christ 
						  cleansed the temple during his earthly ministry, and when certain 
						  subsequent events occurred. 418 The final fulfillment came in 193 8, 
						  when Christ again came to his temple. 417 

						  In trying to show how this final fulfillment occurred, however, 
						  the Watchtower authors become quite badly confused. According 
						  to Paradise Lost, Christ's coming to the temple in 1918 was his 
						  coming to the earthly Jehovah-Witness organization to cleanse it 
						  of rebellious members. 418 According to the authors of The Truth 
						  Shall Make You Free and You May Survive Armageddon, how- 
						  ever, the temple Christ came to in 1918 was not the earthly 
						  organization but the heavenly temple. 419 So there is ambiguity as to 
						  which temple he came to. Even if one understands Jehovah's 
						  Witnesses to mean by the temple to which Christ came in 1918 
						  the heavenly one rather than the earthly organization, one is still at 
						  a loss to know exactly what they are trying to say. For, ( 3 ) if the 
						  heavenly temple is just another name for the 144,000, it is not cor- 
						  rect to say that Christ came to them in 1918, for they were then 
						  "raised" to be with him in heaven; it would be more correct to say 

						  temple . . . consists of more than Jesus alone. It includes his congregation 
						  of 144,000 spiritual members, the spiritual body of which Jesus Christ 
						  is Head" ( You May Survive Armageddon, p. 81). Members of the 
						  anointed class are often described as "living stones" of that temple 
						  (ibid., pp. 96, 108; Let Your Name Be Sanctified, p. 274). At other 
						  times, however, one receives the impression that this heavenly temple 
						  is a place in heaven to which the members of the anointed class go after 
						  they die: "They [the deceased anointed ones] are now with him [Christ] 
						  at the temple, that is, in the condition of unity with him in the place 
						  invisible to human eyes, which place is symbolized by the 'air'" (The 
						  Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 304). 

						  410 You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 91-97. 

						  -* 1 ' Ibid., pp. 98ff.; The Truth Shall Make You Free, pp. 303, 324. 

						  " s Paradise Lost, p. 213. 

						  ■»'!' The Truth Shall Make You Free, pp. 303-4; on p. 324. this 
						  coming to the heavenly temple is called Christ's epiphaneia or "appearing" in 
						  distinction from his parousia. which occurred in 1914. Cf. You May 
						  Survive Armageddon, pp. 103-4; on the latter page it is said that 
						  the resurrection of the sleeping temple stones took place shortly after 
						  the arrival of Adonai [the Lord] and His messenger at the spiritual 
						  temple on the heavenly Mount Zion. 



						  Doctrines 95 

						  that, in 1918, the temple came to Christ. If, however, (2) the hea- 
						  venly temple is the name of a certain place in heaven, we wonder 
						  where this place is. From New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 319, 
						  we learn that the 144,000 who are "raised" "are by such a spiritual, 
						  heavenly resurrection granted to sit with Jesus Christ in his 
						  throne, even as he conquered this old world and sat down with 
						  his Father in His throne." These words imply that the place to 
						  which the "raised" 144,000 go is the place where Christ is (for 
						  Christ has been seated on the throne since 1914). If this is 
						  so, how can Christ be said to "come to his temple" in 1918? How 
						  can one "come to" a place where he already is? 420 

						  The "first resurrection." We should now examine in greater 
						  detail what Jehovah's Witnesses mean by the "resurrection" of the 
						  deceased members of the anointed class which occurred in 1918. 
						  The Witnesses distinguish between a first or earlier resurrection 
						  and later resurrections. 421 These resurrections, however, are dis- 
						  tinguished not just in time but also in manner; the "first" or 
						  "earlier" resurrection is said to be a nonphysical one, whereas 
						  the later resurrections are said to be physical. 

						  What is the nature of this "first resurrection"? The following 
						  rather lengthy quotation describes both types of resurrection: 

						  Resurrection is a restoration to life of the nonexistent dead. 
						  ... It is an act of God dependent entirely upon God's marvelous 
						  power through Christ and upon His memory of the dead. It is 
						  the reactivating of the life pattern of the creature, a transcrip- 
						  tion of which is on record with God, and is referred to as being 
						  in His memory. Resurrection does not involve the restoring of 
						  the original identical body of the creature. The life pattern is 
						  the personal life-long record of the creature built up by his 
						  thoughts and by the experiences in the life he has lived resulting 
						  from certain habits, leanings, mental abilities, memories and 

						  420 On p. 275 of This Means Everlasting Life it is unequivocally asserted 
						  that the throne from which Christ rules in heaven is at the same time the 
						  place where he ministers in the heavenly temple: "It is from heaven that 
						  Christ and his 144,000 associate kings rule, for Christ Jesus sits at God's 
						  right hand. . . . The throne, heaven, is the place for kings to rule from, and 
						  not the footstool, the earth. Moreover, it is the Most Holy of all, the heaven 
						  itself of God's presence, where the High Priest of God applies the merit of 
						  his sacrifice for the sake of humankind." 

						  4 - 1 They call the "resurrection" of the 144,000 the "first resurrection," 
						  basing this on Rev. 20:6 (Let God Be True, p. 277); at times, however, 
						  they also refer to this as the "earlier resurrection," basing this designation 
						  on the NWT of Phil. 3:11, where the Greek word exanastasis is rendered, 
						  wholly without lexical warrant, earlier resurrection (ibid., p. 282). 



						  96 Jehovah's Witnesses 

						  history. It is also a register of the individual's intellectual 
						  growth and his characteristics, all of which make up one's per- 
						  sonality. Hence, according to God's will for the creature, in a 
						  resurrection one is restored or re-created in either a human or a 
						  spirit body and yet retains his personal identity by the setting in 
						  motion again of the distinctive life pattern of that individual. 422 

						  Note that resurrection is here defined as a restoration to life of 
						  the nonexistent dead, that it is dependent upon God's memory of 
						  the dead, that it is a reactivation of the life pattern of the creature 
						  rather than a restoring of the creature's original body, and that 
						  it is by this reactivation of the life pattern that the personal 
						  identity of the individual is to be retained. Note, too, that one 
						  may be restored in "either a human or a spirit body." In the "first 
						  resurrection" individuals are restored in spirit bodies.™ 

						  This "first resurrection" follows the pattern of Christ's resurrec- 
						  tion. As he was "raised" without a physical body in order to 
						  partake of heavenly life, so also are the members of the anointed 
						  class. Only Christ and the 144,000, therefore, participate in 
						  this "first resurrection." When the Bible says that Christ is 
						  the "firstfruits of them which are asleep" (I Cor. 15:20), this 
						  does not mean that he was the firstfruits of all believers who have 
						  died, but only of the 144,000. 424 

						  This "first resurrection" was therefore not a bodily resurrection 
						  in the sense that these individuals were raised with physical bodies. 
						  It is called, as a matter of fact, a "spiritual, heavenly resurrec- 
						  tion." 425 The members of the anointed class "raised" in 1918 
						  are said to have been raised with "spirit bodies" to join Christ at 
						  the spiritual temple, 428 to have become "invisible spirit crea- 
						  tures," 427 and to have entered upon "spirit life in the heavens." 428 
						  We are, in fact, given the distinct impression that this "spirit 

						  422 Make Sure of All Things, p. 311. 

						  42 - H The expression "spirit body" will be puzzling to most readers. It 
						  will be recalled that, according to Watchtower teaching, a heavenly 
						  soul "consists of a body together with the life principle or life force 
						  actuating it" (above, p. 56). So there are "heavenly" bodies as well as earthly, 
						  physical bodies. The author was told by Mr. Ulysses Glass, a member of the 
						  Watchtower staff, that these "heavenly bodies" will be vastly superior to the 
						  bodies of those on earth (personal interview, June 6, 1962). 

						  424 Let God Be True, pp. 276-77. 

						  42. r > New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 319. 

						  42 8 Lei God Be True, p. 203. 

						  ■»•■« Ibid., p. 138. 

						  42 « Paradise Lost, p. 231. 



						  Doctrines 97 

						  life" is a more perfect form of life than one which would in- 
						  volve a physical resurrection: "The 'resurrection of life' includes 
						  the 'first resurrection,' which is the resurrection to instantaneous 
						  perfection of life, spirit life, in which Jesus himself participated 
						  and in which only the 144,000 joint heirs participate with him." 4 - 

						  Since this was a "resurrection" to a heavenly, spirit existence, 
						  it was invisible to human eyes. 43 " In the case of those "raised" 
						  in 1918, this event was a transition from nonexistence to spirit- 
						  existence, possible only because God had on record a trans- 
						  scription of the life patterns of these individuals. 431 Actually, 
						  therefore, God re-created them on the basis of His memory of 
						  what they were like before they died. 

						  Jehovah's Witnesses do not teach, however, that in 1918 the 
						  total number of the anointed class was "raised" with a spiritual 
						  resurrection. A "remnant" of the 144,000 was still alive in 
						  1918; a "remnant" is still alive today; and there will be a "remnant" 
						  of this group left on earth during the coming millennium. 432 So 
						  the question arises: What happens to the members of this remnant 
						  when they die? The answer is: they undergo the "first resur- 
						  rection" at the moment of their death. Immediately at death 
						  they enter into an "eternal spirit existence," 483 are "resurrected 
						  in the spirit," 434 are "changed instantaneously to spirits immortal, 
						  incorruptible," 435 and "receive an immediate change to spirit 
						  life." 43 " They are changed from being human creatures to being 
						  spirit creatures in heaven with Christ. 437 At another place we 

						  ■*'"■> You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 354-55. One is tempted to ask: 
						  if perfection of life is spirit life, how could Jesus have lived a perfect life 
						    on earth in a body? One senses at this point a kind of Gnostic devaluation 
						    of the body. 

						    4311 Let God Be True, p. 278; The Kingdom is at Hand, p. 304. 

						    +3i Make Sure of All Things, pp. 311, 313. 

						    4:i - Let God Be True, p. 278; Paradise Lost, p. 231; New Heavens and 
						    a New Earth, p. 321. In the last-named reference it is specifically stated 
						    that "the thousand-year reign does not have to wait until they [the last 
						    of the remnant] are glorified in the heavens. . . ." 

						    4:w Let God Be True, p. 129. In this connection the authors quote 1 
						    Cor. 15:51-52, "We all shall not sleep but we shall all be changed, in a 
						    moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump. . ." (cf. Paradise 
						    Lost, p. 232). Apparently the "last trump" is thought to sound every 
						    time a member of the remnant dies! 

						    434 Let God Be True, p. 279. 

						    435 This Means Everlasting Life, p. 235. 

						    «« Let God Be True, p. 203. Cf. This Means Everlasting Life, p. 231; 
						    Paradise Lost, p. 231. 
						    «7 Paradise Lost, p. 232. 



						    98 Jehovah's Witnesses 

						    are told: ". . . At death they are changed from human to divine, 
						    incorruptible, immortal, spiritual, in but a moment or twinkling 
						    of an eye. . . ." 438 

						    As this last quotation indicates ("changed from human to 
						    divine"), this "first resurrection" is a kind of deification of the 
						    members of the anointed class. This does not mean, of course, 
						    that the "little flock" now become equal to Jehovah God, but 
						    they do become virtually equal to Christ — who is also "divine," 
						    though not equal to Jehovah. Note the following parallels be- 
						    tween what happens to the members of the anointed class and 
						    what happened to Christ: (1) Like Christ, they are "raised" 
						    with spirit bodies for life in heaven; (2) like Christ, they have 
						    sacrificed their rights to life on earth in order to earn the right 
						    to life in heaven; 439 (3) like Christ, they attain immortality — 
						    an immortality which is shared by no other creatures, not even the 
						    angels; (4) like Christ, they have been begotten by God's spirit 
						    to become spiritual sons of God; (5) like Christ, they reign after 
						    death from a heavenly throne. Thus, as has been previously 
						    observed, 440 the difference between Christ and the 144,000, for 
						    the Witnesses, is not one of kind but only one of degree. And 
						    at this point we may well wonder whether one is justified in affirm- 
						    ing even a difference of degree! 441 

						    In referring to this "first resurrection" I have been putting 
						    the word resurrection between quotation marks since I do not 
						    believe that this can properly be called a resurrection. I make 
						    this judgment for two reasons: 

						    ( 1 ) As was noted in the case of the Seventh-day Adventists, 442 
						    this is not really a resurrection because, at least in the case of those 
						    "raised" in 1918, these individuals had been completely annihilated 
						    when they died; hence it would be more accurate to call their "resto- 
						    ration" to life in 1 91 8 a new creation. 

						    (2) The word resurrection has always been understood by the 
						    Christian church to mean resurrection with a physical body. 

						    438 f^ew Heavens and a New Earth, p. 320. Cf. Make Sure of All 
						    Things, p. 247, where we are told that Christ and the 144.000 in heaven 
						    share a "divine nature." 

						    «9 See above, pp. 72, 75. 

						    440 See above, p. 65. 

						    4 -" On p. 275 of This Means Everlasting Life the astounding suggestion 
						    is made that the 144,000 must help to bring back the dead who are in 
						    the graves! 

						    44 - See The Four Major Cults, p. 140. 



						    Doctrines 99 

						    Giving to people who had previously been annihilated a new 
						    existence as "spirit creatures" (or transforming people instanta- 
						    neously from physical beings to "spirit creatures," in the case of 
						    those "raised" after 1918) is not a resurrection but rather a 
						    change into a different kind of existence. 

						    In the history of the Christian church, people who taught that 
						    the "resurrection" was a nonphysical one were branded as heretics. 
						    The early fathers vigorously defended the resurrection of the body 
						    (in a physical sense) as a distinctively Christian doctrine over 
						    against those who, under the influence of Greek philosophy or 
						    Gnostic speculation, denied this teaching. 44 "' Yet today Jehovah's 
						    Witnesses, claiming to be listening to Scripture alone, are again 
						    reviving this ancient heresy! 

						    It should now be added, by way of evaluation, that, as was ob- 
						    served in the case of the "resurrection" of Jesus Christ, 444 so 
						    here also there is no real continuity between the state of being in 
						    the flesh and the "resurrection" state. Christ by his "resur- 
						    rection" was changed from a human being to a spirit creature. So 
						    it is with the 144,000: by their "resurrection" they are changed 
						    from being human creatures to being spirit creatures. 445 From 
						    their own description of this change, therefore, we learn that, 
						    for the Witnesses, the 144,000 cease to be human beings after 
						      their "resurrection." They enter into an entirely different kind 
						      of existence: a spirit existence. It would not be inaccurate to say 
						      that the 144,000 are, at death, changed into angels (angels, that 
						      is, who are now immortal, in distinction from ordinary angels, 
						      who remain mortal). The "resurrection" of the 144,000 is, 
						      therefore, really the creation of a new type of being — not a 
						      resurrection of human beings. 

						      The Judgment of the Nations. Jehovah's Witnesses distinguish 
						      various judgment days. iW One of these days of judgment began 
						      when Christ came to the temple in 1918. 44T "In the spring of 

						      44S See, e.g., Polycarp, To The Philippians, 7; The Epistle of Barnabas, 
						      5 and 21; // Clement, 9; Justin Martyr, First Apology, 18-19; Tatian, To 
						      the Greeks, 6; Theophilus, To Autolycus, I, 7; Athenagoras, The 
						      Resurrection of the Dead, 18-25; Irenaeus, Against Heresies: II, 29, 2; IV, 
						      5, 2. 

						      ■*** See above, p. 66. 

						      •14.-, p ar aJise Lost, p. 232. 

						      «« Make Sure of All Tilings, pp. 219-25. 

						      447 Let God Be True, p. 277. We note here some similarity to the "in- 
						      vestigative judgment" of the Seventh-day Adventists. It will be recalled 
						      that Russell had some early associations with the Adventists. As the 



						      100 Jehovah's Witnesses 

						      1918," it is said, "he [Christ] came as Jehovah's Messenger to 
						      the temple and began judgment first of the 'house of God' and 
						      then of the nations of this world." 448 

						      This judgment which began at the house of God is, however, 
						      variously interpreted. In one place we are told that this judg- 
						      ment was accomplished by the "resurrection" of the anointed class, 
						      by which a favorable judgment was rendered to the house of 
						      God. 449 At another place in the same book, however, we are 
						      informed that this judgment consisted in the following: The 
						      faithful ones who took up the witnessing work in 1918 and 
						      1919, and who began to serve spiritual food to the spiritually 
						      hungry at this time, were judged by Jehovah to be the "faithful 
						      and discreet slave class." Thus, it is alleged, Jehovah indicated 
						      who were His True people, distinguishing them from those who 
						      falsely claimed to be the "house of God," namely, the churches 
						      of Christendom. 450 One may apparently adopt either interpreta- 
						      tion, or both. 

						      In the spring of 1918 Christ also began his judgment of the 
						      nations. This teaching is derived from Matthew 25:31-46, the 
						      passage which speaks of the judgment of the sheep and the 
						      goats. 4 " 1 This judgment, it is said, takes place during the "time 
						      of the end," that is, from the spring of 1918 to the Battle of 
						      Armageddon. 4 '" 2 Christ, now seated on the throne of his glory, 
						      is busy separating the people of the nations into two classes, 
						      called sheep and goats. 4 -™ The basis for this judgment is the 
						      attitude people take toward the kingdom message and its bearers, 
						      the remnant. 454 The goats are those who have no appreciation 
						      for the kingdom message and who show no help or kindness to 
							the bearers of this message; 4 -' 15 this group will include Christendom 
							because it has had no charity for the remnant of Christ's broth- 



							Watchtower understanding of this judgment at the temple is unfolded, 
							however, it will become evident that the teaching of the Witnesses here 
							is quite different from that of Seventh-day Adventism. 

							44K Ibid., p. 287. In connection with the judgment which began at the 
							"house of God," I Peter 4:17 is quoted. 

							449 You May Survive Armageddon, p. 117. 

							4S " Ibid., pp. 207-208. To understand what Jehovah's Witnesses mean 
							by the "faithful and discreet slave class," see above, pp. 33-34. 

							45 ' Let God Be True. p. 290. 

							4r, ~ You May Survive Armageddon, p. 160. 

							45:1 Let God Be True. p. 204. 

							4 ' r ' 4 Ibid., d. 290; You May Survive Armageddon, p. 163. 

							4 -">"> Let God Be True, p. 290. 



							Doctrines 101 

							ers. 4r '° The sheep, however, are those who rejoice at the coming 
							of the kingdom and do good to the remnant who bear the mes- 
							sage. 457 By the time of the Battle of Armageddon this judging 
							of the nations will have been completed; the sheep will have been 
							gathered at the king's right side, into company with the remnant, 
							whereas the goats will have been gathered at his left side. 4 ™ At 
							the Battle of Armageddon the judgment against the nations will be 
							executed. 4r,!l Then the goats will be destroyed and annihilated, 
							whereas the sheep will live through the battle and "enter upon 
							the opportunities for everlasting life in the new world." 400 

							The Battle oj Armageddon. Before the glorious new world 
							can be ushered in, however, there will occur a battle more terrible 
							than anything the world has ever seen. "Armageddon will be the 
							worst thing ever to hit the earth within the history of man." 4 " 1 
							What kind of battle will this be? 

							We find a brief definition of it on page 24 of Make Sure of All 
							Things : 

							The battle of Jehovah God Almighty in which his executive 
							officer Christ Jesus leads invisible forces of righteousness to de- 
							stroy Satan and his demonic and human organization, eliminating 
							wickedness from the universe and vindicating Jehovah's universal 
							sovereignty. 

							From this definition we learn that Armageddon will be Jehovah's 
							decisive (though not final) battle against His enemies, both 
							demonic and human; that Christ will be Jehovah's executive 
							officer, leading invisible forces to victory; and that this battle 
							will result in the elimination of wickedness and the vindication 
							of Jehovah's sovereignty. 482 

							The background for the Battle of Armageddon is the tribulation 
							brought upon Satan's world by Christ, who has taken action to 

							tsii You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 165-66. 

							4r > 7 Lei God lie True, p. 290; You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 164-65. 

							4r,s You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 164-68. 

							*'">» Let God' Be True, p. 287. 

							■»fic> You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 165-67. The moral is obvious: 
							if you want to survive Armageddon and enter the paradise of the new 
							  world, you must leave Christendom and join the Jehovah-Witness move- 
							  ment! 

							  4<il Statement made by Nathan Knorr at the 1953 Yankee-Stadium 
							  Assembly, quoted in You May Survive Armageddon, p. II. 

							  4n2 It will be recalled that the vindication of Jehovah's sovereignty is, 
							  for the Witnesses, the primary purpose of world history (see above, pp. 
							    49-50). 



							    1 02 Jehovah's Witnesses 

							    unseat Satan from his position as ruler of the earth. Actual combat 
							    against Satan and his demon horde began with Christ's enthrone- 
							    ment in a.d. 1914. This combat was cut short in a.d. 1918, 
							    to be resumed at Armageddon. 4<ia "In between, while this 
							    tribulation is cut short, there is a work of proclaiming the Kingdom 
							    and its day of vengeance, and of exposing Satan's filthy organiza- 
							    tion. . . ." 4li4 Because it is believed that only those who are 
							    members of the Watchtower organization, whether as anointed 
							    ones or other sheep, will survive Armageddon, 405 and because 
							    it is further believed that no one who dies at Armageddon will 
							    be raised from the dead during the millennium, 460 Jehovah's Wit- 
							    nesses preach with great urgency: Come into Jehovah's theocratic 
							    organization now, or be forever annihilated in the Battle of 
							    Armageddon! 4 " 7 

							    This great battle will not be a conflict between capitalism and 
							    communism, nor will it be a destruction of the nations through 
							    atomic energy, but it will be Jehovah's fight in which both the 
							    invisible and visible parts of Satan's world will be completely 
							    destroyed. 46K Armageddon, the "war of the great day of God 
							    the Almighty" (Rev. 16: 14), 46! > will be a war in which the nations 
							    of the world will fight against God's kingdom headed by His 
							    Anointed One, Jesus 470 ; it will be a battle between those who are 
							    for and those who are against Jehovah's universal sovereignty. 471 
							      Jehovah will actually welcome this fight, for it will give Him the 
							      opportunity of vindicating His universal sovereignty over the 
							      earth. 472 

							      4li3 Make Sure of All Things, p. 390. The astounding implication of 
							      these words is that Christ did not engage in actual combat with Satan 
							      previous to 1914, and that he does not do so between 1918 and Arma- 
							      geddon ! 

							      -»«-t Ibid. 

							      -itt'i Paradise Lost, p. 210; You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 217, 347. 

							      4<i« "The unrighteous 'goats' will be everlastingly cut off from all life 
							      in the battle of Armageddon with which this old world will end" {Paradise 
							      Lost, p. 202). 

							      4(i7 Let God Be True, pp. 260, 201. In the latter passage the role of 
							      Jehovah's Witnesses is compared to that of Noah before the flood. 

							      4B8 Ibid., p. 259. This statement must not be taken entirely at face 
							      value, however, since Satan is only "abyssed" at Armageddon, to be 
							      loosed again at !he end of the millennium. 

							      4 «» Paradise Lost, p. 203. 

							      470 You May Survive Armageddon, p. 333. 

							      ■"i Ibid., p. 338. 

							      47 - Ibid., p. 334. Note the conception of the nature of Jehovah which 
							      underlies this statement! 



							      Doctrines 1 03 

							      Satan is now grouping his forces in preparation for the war of 
							      Armageddon. 4 ™ His demons are leading the nations to prepare 
							      to do battle against those who visibly represent the kingdom of 
							      God, the remnant and their companions in the New World 
							      Society. 474 

							      Where will this battle be fought? Though the word Armaged- 
							      don, or Har-Magedon, derived from Rev. 16:36, means "mountain 
							      of Megiddo," this battle will not be fought just at the field of 
							      Megiddo in Palestine since this battlefield would be too small 
							      to hold all the kings of the earth and their armies. 47 " The battle will 
							      be fought in all quarters of the globe. 470 The reason why this battle 
							      is called that of Armageddon is that the battles fought in ancient 
							      times at Megiddo in Palestine were decisive: the armies that won 
							      there won complete victories, whereas those that lost suffered total 
							      defeat. 477 

							      When will this battle be fought? At the close of the "time of 
							      the end," which will be very soon. 478 It was affirmed in 1952 
							      that this war would begin inside our generation. 479 In a volume 
							      published in 1958 we are told that many people alive since 1914 
							      will still be living when Armageddon begins. 480 

							      Just before Armageddon begins, the devil will attack the New 
							      World Society. 481 This attack will provoke Jehovah to anger; 
							      He will then unleash the Battle of Armageddon by giving Christ 
							      the command to destroy the devil's wicked world. 482 The invisible 
							      "appearance" of Christ at this time is called "the revelation of the 
							      Lord Jesus from heaven" depicted in II Thessalonians 1:7-10 483 ; 
							      this revelation (apokalupsis) is distinguished from the second 
							      presence of Christ (parousia) which occurred in 19 14. 484 This 



							      4 ™ Let God Be True, p. 259. 

							      474 You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 333-34. At this point Rev. 
							      12:17 is quoted, the same passage to which Seventh-day Adventists appeal 
							      to support their conception of the "remnant church." Cf. Paradise Lost, 
							      p. 203, where a similar statement is made, buttressed by a reference to 
							      Rev. 16:14, 16. 

							      475 Paradise Lost, pp. 203-4. 

							      *"•> You May Survive Armageddon, p. 337. 

							      477 Paradise Lost, p. 203. 

							      47 » Ibid., p. 205. 

							      47!) Let God Be True, p. 179. 

							      480 Paradise Lost, p. 205. 

							      4 «i Ibid., p. 206. 

							      «2 Ibid., p. 207. 

							      483 You May Survive Armageddon, p. 27. 

							      4N4 This Means Everlasting Life, p. 222. 



							      104 Jehovah's Witnesses 

							      "appearance" of Christ on earth is called "the final revelation of 
							      the King" 485 and is even referred to as his "return." 486 

							      Who will be drawn up in battle array at the War of Armaged- 
							      don? On the one side will be all the nations of the world, the 
							      members of the United Nations (the beast of Rev. 17), the 
							      religious heads of heathendom and Christendom (the woman who 
							      rides the beast), and all the goats that have been separated from 
							      the sheep by the judgment of the nations just concluded (this 
							      last group will include most of Christendom). 487 On the other 
							      side will be the remnant of spiritual Israel (that is, the members of 
							      the 144,000 left on earth at that time) and the "great crowd" of 
							      other sheep 488 — a crowd, however, which will look very small 
							      compared to the vast hordes which oppose them. In addition 
							      to these visible forces there will be invisible combatants as well. 
							      Fighting against God will be the devil and all the demons. 489 
							      Fighting on the side of the remnant and the other sheep, however, 
							      will be Jesus Christ and, following his leadership, the unseen hosts 
							      of heaven (that is, the angels) together with those of his anointed 
							      followers who have been "resurrected." 480 

							      The remnant and the other sheep do not need to fight at 
							      Armageddon; Christ and his heavenly armies will do all the fighting 
							      for them. 4 " 1 When we ask what weapons will be used by the 
								rebellious nations, we get an ambiguous answer. On the one 
								hand we are told that the nations will use their military, naval, and 
								air equipment, 492 and that they will release atomic bombs, hydro- 
								ps Let God Be True, p. 205. 

								486 Ibid., p. 206. So there are two "returns" of Christ: the first one, 
								which occurred in 1914, when he ascended the throne of his kingdom; 
								and a second one, which will occur when he comes to earth to conduct 
								the Battle of Armageddon! It is therefore not quite correct to say that 
								Jehovah's Witnesses do not look for any future "return" of Christ. Even 
								this future return, however, will be an invisible one (ibid., p. 205). 

								487 You May Survive Armageddon, p. 338; see above, pp. 43-44. It is 
								evident from this description why Jehovah's Witnesses attack not only all 
								churches but also all political organizations and governments. All govern- 
								ments and all churches are part of the devil's visible organization. The 
								Witnesses therefore refuse to salute the flag of any nation since, so 
								they say, such an act ascribes salvation to the nation for which the flag 
								stands, and is an act of idolatry (Let God Be True, pp. 242-43). 

								488 You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 338-39. 
								4 «» Paradise Lost, p. 203. 

								4il " You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 338-39. The revelation of 
								Christ at Armageddon will, however, be an invisible one. Thus neither 
								Christ nor his heavenly armies will be seen by men. 

								41)1 Paradise Lost, p. 204. 

								492 You May Survive Armageddon, p. 337. 



								Doctrines 105 

								gen bombs, disease-germ bombs, and chemical gas bombs. 41 " 
								Yet on the other hand we are informed that the wood of the weap- 
								ons of Gog's hordes (that is, those of the devil) will make so large 
								a pile that it will take seven years to use it up as fuel. These 
								weapons are then designated as follows: shields, bows and arrows, 
								handstaves, and spears. 4 " 4 Jehovah, however, will completely 
								exterminate His enemies by unleashing such terrors as cloudbursts, 
								floods, earthquakes, hailstones, fires, and flesh-eating plagues. 495 
								The fire of Armageddon will, in fact, be far more destructive than 
								literal fire; it will completely envelop the devil's visible and in- 
								visible organizations. 49 " 

								The results of this terrible battle will be worse than those of any 
								previous war in history. Over two billion people will die. 497 
								All of Christendom will be wiped out, 4 " 8 and all the nations will be 
								destroyed. 499 "Satan's entire world or system of things, its in- 
								visible demonic heavens and its visible wicked human earth, will 
								be destroyed. . . ." r,0 ° Dead bodies will be everywhere, from one 
								end of the earth to the other; these shall neither be wept over nor 
								buried." 01 Not a single human being who was against Jehovah's 
								organization will survive. 502 

								Only faithful Jehovah's Witnesses — members of the remnant or 
								of the other sheep — will survive Armageddon; these "will stand 
								and see the salvation of Jehovah for them." 50:1 Jehovah will not 
								allow His executioners to touch them. 504 These Armageddon sur- 
								vivors will be assigned the duty of gathering up the bones that 
								are left of the slain, and of burying them (not the bodies; just the 

								■»»3 Ibid., p. 340. 

								*» 4 Ibid., p. 343. 

								*'J5 Paradise Lost, pp. 207-208. 

								4!)if ]\j cw Heavens and u New Earth, p. 294. 

								-li)7 You May Survive Armageddon, p. 341. 

								«s Ibid., p. 217. 

								•*»» Ibid., p. 57. 

								5«« Ibid., p. 346. 

								«" Paradise Lost, p. 210. 

								• r '°- You May Survive Armageddon, p. 342. 

								sioa ibid., p. 347. Note that what determines survival at Armageddon is 
								not first of all faith in Jesus Christ as Saviour, but membership in the New 
								World Society. Faith in the all-sufficient atonement of Christ will not save 
								from total annihilation any member of "Christendom" unaffiliated with the 
								Watchtower organization. 

								r » 04 Ibid., p. 217. When we ask how anyone can be expected to live 
								through this devastating holocaust, or how Jehovah's Witnesses will be 
								kept safe from enemy bullets and bombs, we are told that "Jehovah will 
								perform a stupendous miracle in preserving them [His people] through the 
								terrifying destruction" {This Means Everlasting Life, p. 266). 



								106 Jehovah's Witnesses 

								bleached bones). 505 The survivors are also given the task of 
								converting whatever instruments of combat are left on the earth 
								into implements of peace. 506 

								To complete the story of the Battle of Armageddon, it should 
								be mentioned that, at the end of the battle, Satan and his demons 
								are cast into the "abyss" by Christ, who is said to be the angel 
								referred to in Revelation 20: l. 3 " 7 The abyss is not a symbol for 
								the condition of nonexistence; it stands for a deathlike state of in- 
								activity. 3C,K Thus, both the devil and his demons having been 
								rendered inactive, the world is ready for the millennium which 
								now begins. 

								The Millennium. Jehovah's Witnesses understand the thousand 
								years of Revelation 20 as pointing to a literal thousand-year 
								period, beginning immediately after Armageddon, during which 
								God's new world is to be established on earth. This period is 
								referred to in their literature as that of Christ's millennial reign, 509 
								or of his thousand-year reign. 510 God's new world is said to 
								consist of "new heavens and a new earth." By the new heavens 
								the Witnesses understand "the righteous new heavenly ruling 
								powers, Christ Jesus with his 'bride' of 144,000 members." 511 
								By the new earth they mean "not a new earthly globe, but the 
								righteous earthly subjects of the King living under a new social 
								arrangement. " 51 - 

								This leads us to consider the role of the 144,000 during the 
								millennium. They are, of course, not on earth but in heaven 
								(except for those few still living on earth after Armageddon, 

								n(,i "> Paradise Lost, p. 211. 

								.-.ou The Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 360. 

								•"'"" Paradise Lost, p. 211. 

								5(IS Ibid. 

								5oh .Vevv Heavens and a New Earth, p. 321. 

								ski Paradise Lost, p. 226. At this point a question arises: Since Christ 
								began ruling from his heavenly throne in 1914, why is this period referred 
								to as "the thousand years of Christ's reign" (Let God Be True, p. 270)? 
								And how can the 144,000 be said to reign a thousand years with Christ 
								during the millennium (ibid., p. 137). when they actually began to reign 
								with him in 1918? 

								•~' n Religion for Mankind, p. 377. Actually, the new heavens in this 
								sense began to come into existence in 1918, when the first group of 
								anointed ones began to be "raised"; these new heavens, further, are not 
								complete until some time after the millennium has begun since there will 
								still be members of the remnant living on earth after Armageddon. 

								•">•- Ibid. It will be recalled that in the Battle of Armageddon Satan's 
								demonic heavens and wicked human earth were destroyed (see above, p. 
								105). 



								Doctrines 107 

								who will join the heavenly assembly as soon as they die). 513 The 
								144,000 in heaven are, during the millennium, the invisible part 
								of the new world, r ' 14 the ruling body of Jehovah's universal organi- 
								zation. 515 In the capacity of priests and kings they reign with Christ 
								during the millennium. 51 " They may therefore be called "associate 
								kings" and "royal priests" 51 '; since the power of judging has also 
								been bestowed upon them, 518 they may in addition be called 
								"associate judges." 519 It may be gathered from the above that the 
								144,000 will therefore help Christ in carrying out his kingly, 
								priestly, and judicial activities. We are told, in fact, that they 
								"join him [Christ] in dispensing the benefits of Christ's ransom 
								sacrifice to the believers of mankind during the thousand years of 
								the Kingdom rule." 520 We are further informed that they must 
								officiate as priests "for the everlasting good of mankind, even 
								to bringing back all the dead who are in the graves." 5 - 1 Christ, 
								in fact, will not even be able to bring the inhabitants of God's new 
								world to perfection without the help of his heavenly bride: 

								The ministry of the heavenly High Priest together with the 
								144,000 who will be his underpriests and "priests of God" will 
								lift up the antitypical twelve tribes of Israel to human perfection 
								by the end of the thousand years of Christ's reign. 52 -' 

								What will the earth be like during the millennium? The earth, 
								it is said, will be cleansed after Armageddon. 523 Soon after the 
								devastation of Armageddon has been removed, the earth will be- 
								come a new paradise, replacing the paradise lost at the dawn of 
								history. 524 The whole earth will be made into a garden; under 

								sis New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 321; You May Survive Arma- 
								geddon, p. 352. 

								•"'i 4 Lei God Be True, p. 138. 

								" r > Ibid., d. 130. 

								•■>"« Ibid., p. 137. 

								517 This Means Everlasting Life, p. 275. 

								~> lH You May Survive Armageddon, p. 276. 

								• r >™ Make Sure of All Things, p. 221. 

								r >- H This Means Everlasting Life, pp. 274-75. Christ therefore needs the 
								services of the 144.000 in applying the fruits of his atonement to his 
								people. 

								r>2 ' Ibid., p. 275. Apparently Christ cannot raise the dead without the 
								help of the 144,000. 

								: '-- You May Survive Armageddon, p. 353. 

								■ _> - :! Paradise Lost, p. 216. Yet this cleansing is not final. For, on p. 
								239 of the same volume, we are toid that it is not until the execution of 
								judgment over Satan and his followers al the end of the millennium that 
								the perfect earth will be cleansed. 

								r ' 24 " Ibid., pp. 220ff. 



								108 Jehovah's Witnesses 

								Jehovah's direction, aided by an ideal climate and the absence of 
								destructive pests, the survivors of Armageddon will replant the 
								earthly paradise."'- 5 Man will again subdue the earth and have 
								dominion over the lower creation; all the beasts will now be at 
								peace with each other and with man."'-' 1 On this new earth there 
								will be neither thorns nor thistles. 5 - 7 There will be no more 
								famine or drought; no diseases, aches, or pains; and no more old 
								age, since perpetual youth will be the lot of all the faithful.'"'-'"* 
								Death will also be largely eliminated-"'-" — the only ones who will 
								die during the millennium will be those members of the remnant 
								that survived Armageddon and those inhabitants of the new earth 
								who refuse to obey Jehovah (these as we shall see, will be 
								annihilated). All results of sin in human social life will also have 
								been removed. There will be no more war, no crime, no law- 
								lessness or vice — since all people who want to do bad things 
								have been killed at Armageddon. r,;i " Hence there will be no need 
								for armed troops or for police forces.™ 1 All will be at peace with 
								  each other since all will be united in the worship of the one True 
								  God.™-' 

								  During the millennium the earth, which was denuded of all 
								  human inhabitants except Jehovah's Witnesses by the Battle of 
								  Armageddon, will be repopulated. How will this repopulation 
								  take place? First, by the birth of children to the Armageddon 
								  survivors, and, second, by a series of resurrections. Let us look 
								  at each of these methods in detail. 

								  Children Born During the Millennium. Children will be 
								  born to the survivors of Armageddon. 5 ' ; ' i These Armageddon sur- 
								  vivors may expect to receive a mandate from God through Christ 
								  enjoining them to reproduce their kind."' :u Since not all of these sur- 
								  vivors were married when Armageddon came, there will be mar- 
								  riages during the millennium.™ 5 Because children so born will not 
								  die — unless they prove rebellious — and because room must be 

								  *■■>* Ibid., d. 221. 

								  *-'" Let God Be True, p. 267. 

								  r, -~ Ne iv Heavens and a New Earth, p. 344. 

								  ■">-* Lei God Be True, pp. 267-68. 

								  <™> Ibid., p. 268. 

								  -™ 1 ' Ibid., p. 267; Paradise Lost. pp. 221-22. 

								  '">»' Let God Be True, p. 267. 

								  w Ibid., p. 266. 

								  rv.v.i You May Survive Armageddon, p. 351. 

								  a-.u New Heavens and a New Earth, pp. 331-32. 

								  »™ Let God Be True, p. 269. 



								  Doctrines 109 

								  left on the earth for those who will be raised from the dead, God 
								  will see to it that, at a certain point of time, childbearing will 
								  cease. 3:1 " 

								  A word should be said about the nature of these children. 
								  Infant death, needless to say, will no longer occur during the 
								  millennium; neither will any of these children be cripples. 337 Yet 
								  they will not be perfect; "being born of not yet perfect although 
								  righteous parents, 38 * these children will not be born any more 
								  perfect than their parents then." MI1 Though imperfect, the children 
								  born to Armageddon survivors will not grow older, however, nor 
								  weaker and impaired with age, but will grow "young, strong, and 
								  gradually freed from all blemishes and marks of imperfection." 34 " 
								  Their parents will teach them to do right, transmitting to them 
								  God's instructions. Though Godfearing parents before the 
								  millennium train their children in an imperfect way, during the 
								  millennium parents will be able to perform this task "in a 
								  perfect and complete way under God's direction." 34 ' 

								  Resurrections During the Millennium. Before discussing the 
								  various groups that will be raised during the millennium, we should 
								  examine the nature of these resurrections. According to Jehovah- 
								  Witness teaching, there is no soul which survives after death. When 
								  a man dies he totally ceases to exist. 34 - Yet the Witnesses do 
								  teach that people will be "raised" from the dead. We have already 
								  looked at their teaching on the so-called first or nonphysical 
								  "resurrection" which the members of the anointed class experience. 
								  There are others, however — their number will far exceed that 

								  • r i ;:i1 Paradise Lost, p. 225. There appears to be some ambiguity in 
								  Jehovah-Witness teaching on the question of whether only Armageddon 
								  survivors will be able to bring forth children during the millennium, 
								  or whether this privilege will be extended also to the other sheep raised 
								  from the dead after Armageddon. On pp. 362-64 of The Truth Shall 
								  Make You Free (published in 1943) we are told that the other sheep 
								  raised after Armageddon will have a part in fulfilling the divine mandate 
								  to bring forth children. In later publications, however, it is said that 
								  only Armageddon survivors will have this privilege (Let God Be True, 
								  pp. 268-69; Paradise Lost, pp. 224, 226). Perhaps there has been a shift 
								  in Watchtower thinking on this point. 

								  '"'•'" Paradise Lost, p. 225. 

								  ii.-tn a strange combination, to say the least! 

								  r>:!! » New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 346. 

								  Mo You May Survive Armageddon, p. 353. 

								  r>-u Paradise Lost, pp. 224-25. Another strange combination: parents 
								  who are still imperfect will be able, during the millennium, to do a perfect 
								  job of training their children! 

								  B * 2 See above, pp. 85-87. 



								  1 1 Jehovah's Witnesses 

								  of 144,000 — who will be raised with physical bodies. Yet 
								  even these resurrections with physical bodies are not, strictly 
								  speaking, resurrections. Since these individuals were totally an- 
								  nihilated when they died, it would be more accurate to call the 
								  "resurrections" which are now said to occur new creations™'* 
								  Interestingly enough, Watchtower authors even use the word create 
								  to describe this type of resurrection: "through Jesus Christ who 
								  died for them [people to be raised during the millennium], God 
								  will create new bodies for them." 54 ' 

								  This type of resurrection is described as a "reactivating of the 
								  life pattern of the creature.""' 4 "' This is possible only because 
								  the life pattern of every creature to be so raised is on record with 
								  God. God therefore re-creates these individuals on the basis of 
								  His memory of what they were like before they died/' 4 " "People 
								  who have been kept in God's memory will be brought back to 
								  life from their death state to enjoy the benefits of God's righteous 
								  new world. " r,4T A human being so raised will retain his personal 
								  identity "by the setting in motion again of the distinctive life 
								  pattern of that individual. " r,4K Such a person will have the same 
								  personality that he had when he died; he will therefore be recogniz- 
								  able by acquaintances. 549 

								  It should be noted that those who are physically raised during 
								  the millennium are not raised with perfect human bodies. Their 

								  54:1 See the comment made about the Seventh-day Adventist conception 
								  of the resurrection in The Four Major Cults, p. 140. 

								  •"'■" Paradise Los!, p. 234. 

								  545 Make Sure of All Things, p. 311 (see above, pp. 95-96, where this 
								  rather detailed description is quoted in full). 

								  • r > 4 « Ibid. 

								  547 Paradise Lost, p. 227. The implication is that some have not been 
								  kept in God's memory and will therefore not be brought back to life. 
								  This point is made explicit on p. 364 of The Truth Shall Make You Free. 
								  Here, speaking of people who are cast into Gehenna, the place of final 
								  destruction, the authors say, '". . . They are not spoken of as 'in the tombs' 
								  or 'in the graves,' which is to say, in the memory of God as having an 
								  opportunity for redemption by Christ's blood. . . . God will not remember 
								  them in the time of 'resurrection of the dead, both of the just and 
								  unjust.' " 

								  ■ r >4N Make Sure of All Things, p. 311. 

								  r,4! * Survival After Death, p. 38. It is significant that, for the Witnesses, 
								  a resurrection with a physical body is of lower value than one with a 
								  nonphysical body, since the latter is experienced only by Christ and the 
								  144,000, whereas the former is experienced by the more numerous other 
								  sheep. Again we see in Watchtower teaching a kind of Gnostic disparage- 
								  ment of the physical body. 



								  Doctrines 111 

								  new bodies, it is said, will match the personalities of the individuals 
								  who are raised — personalities which were neither sinless nor per- 
								  fect at the moment of death."'"'" These individuals, therefore, are 
								  raised in a fallen condition; only by the end of the millennium will 
								  they have been lifted out of their fallen condition and brought to a 
								  condition of human perfection. 551 

								  A great number of people will be raised with physical bodies 
								  during the millennium. One statement, in fact, gives the impres- 
								  sion that most people who have ever lived will be so raised: "The 
								  greater mass of humankind will find life here on earth amid 
								  paradise conditions." 552 There will be some, however, who will 
								  not be brought back from death. Christ himself will judge who 
								  deserve to be raised or who could profit from being raised. SM 

								  Those Not Raised During the Millennium. Let us now note 
								  which individuals will not be raised from the dead. As we have 
								  previously observed, none of those killed at Armageddon will be 
								  raised. All those who knowingly and deliberately did wrong 
								  will not be raised. 554 Those who died wicked beyond reform or 
								  correction and beyond redemption by Christ's blood will not be 
								  raised. 555 This group includes all who have sinned against the 
								  holy spirit. 550 Among those included in the number of people 
								  who will not be raised are Adam and Eve 557 ; it is said that, since 

								  ■"■■">" Paradise Lost, p. 234. 

								  ""' Ibid., p. 238; Let God Be True, p. 293. At the beginning of the 
								  millennium, therefore, all three groups that make up the population of 
								  the new earth are still imperfect: the Armageddon survivors, the children 
								  born to them, and those raised from the dead. Gradually, however, as 
								  the millennium progresses, they advance toward perfection, through the 
								  ministry of the heavenly High Priest and the 144,000 (You May Survive 
								  Armageddon, p, 353). This perfecting does not take place without the 
								  obedient cooperation of millennial mankind with Christ during the thou- 
								  sand years (This Means Everlasting Life, p. 304). 

								  5r >- Lei God Be True, p. 279. Jehovah's Witnesses are not universalists, 
								  since they teach that some will be annihilated. Yet the above statement 
								  suggests that, in their judgment, the number of those annihilated will be 
								  small in comparison with the number of the saved. 

								  r.r>3 You May Survive Armageddon, p. 354. The statement "who could 
								  profit from being raised" is puzzling, in view of the fact that some who are 
								  raised during the millennium will disobey God and consequently be annihi- 
								  lated. Did these individuals really "profit" from their resurrection? Could 
								  not Christ have foreseen their disobedience and simply have left them 
								  in the condition of nonexistence in which they were before their resurrec- 
								  tion? 

								  r,M Paradise Lost, p. 229. 

								  "•"•■"• Let God Be True, p. 289. 

								  r,r,,i Ibid. How can one, however, sin against an impersonal force? 

								  557 Paradise Lost, p. 236. 



								  112 Jehovah's Witnesses 

								  Adam had his final judgment in the garden of Eden, and was sen- 
								  tenced there, he will not be raised for any further judgment 
								  during the millennium.-™ Others who will not be raised include 
								  Cain, 55 " those who died in the flood, the people of Sodom/' 00 
								  Judas Iscariot, and the religious hypocrites of Jesus' day." 61 All 
								  these will simply be left in the nonexistence into which death 
								  has plunged them. 

								  The "Resurrection of Life." Jehovah's Witnesses distinguish 
								  between two kinds of resurrection during the millennium: a "resur- 
								  rection of life" and a "resurrection of judgment." They base 
								  this distinction on the words of Jesus recorded in John 5:28-29: 
								  ". . . the hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs 
								  will hear his voice and come out, those who did good things to a 
								  resurrection of life, those who practiced vile things to a resurrection 
								  of judgment" (NWT). The "resurrection of life" includes the 
								  resurrection of faithful men of God who lived before Pentecost, 
								  and of other sheep who died before Armageddon/' 6 - The "resur- 
								  rection of judgment" is that of the rest of mankind who have not 
								  been judged worthy of being destroyed. BBSi 

								  The "resurrection of life" includes, first, that of Old Testament 
								  people who were faithful to God and that of others who lived 
								  at the time of Christ but died before Pentecost. 564 "These men 
								  knew that their hope was in a resurrection to life right here on 
								  earth. And they really had strong faith in the fact that they would 
								  be resurrected." 30 "' When these ancient worthies are raised, they 
								  will become "other sheep" of the Right Shepherd. 586 

								  Many of these Old Testament saints will be made theocratic 

								  038 L e i God Be True, p. 289. It is striking to note the difference between 
								  the view of Adam held by Mormons and Jehovah's Witnesses. By the 
								  latter, he is not even considered worthy of being raised from the dead; 
								  by the former, however, he is hailed as one of the noblest characters 
								  that ever lived and is even looked upon as a god! (The Four Major Cults, 
								  PP. 41, 51). 

								  M9 You May Survive Armageddon, p. 354. 

								  '•<*> Paradise Lost, p. 236. 

								  r,,il You May Survive Armageddon, p. 354. 

								  rM - Paradise Lost, p. 228. On p. 231 it is said that the resurrection of 
								  the 144,000 was also part of the "resurrection of life." 

								  ««» Ibid., p. 229. 

								  r>64 You May Survive Armageddon, p. 355. 

								  5BS Paradise Lost, p. 228. 

								  r>6« You May Survive Armageddon, p. 355. They cannot become mem- 
								  bers of the 144,000 because they died before Pentecost, when the anointed 
								  class began to be gathered. 



								  Doctrines 1 1 3 

								  princes — that is, will be given princely or leading positions in the 
								  new earth, as the visible representatives of Christ. 567 Among 
								  these will be Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, 568 
								  Moses, and Daniel.""" However, some of the other sheep who 
								  have survived Armageddon will also be made princes'" 70 ; since 
								  many of them occupy positions as theocratic princes in the New 
								  World Society today, before Armageddon, they will carry these 
								  princely responsibilities with them through Armageddon. 571 Thus 
								  the inhabitants of the new earth will be given good rulers, chosen 
								  for this purpose by Jesus Christ himself/' 72 

								    Since those who are to be made princes must serve as rulers 
								    of the new earth, they will be raised first. 573 The next group to 
								    be raised, also as part of the "resurrection of life," will be the 
								    other sheep who died before Armageddon. 574 These, though 
								    unable to share the heavenly blessedness of the 144,000, will be 
								    able to enjoy everlasting life on the paradise earth if they remain 
								    faithful to God. 575 Though Jesus expressly said that they would 
								    inherit the kingdom prepared for them (Mt. 25:34), we are given 
								    to understand that this is not the kingdom of heaven but the 
								    earthly realm of the kingdom of heaven. 576 

								    The "Resurrection of Judgment." After the princes and the 
								    other sheep have been raised, there follows the "resurrection of 
								    judgment." 577 This is the resurrection of people "whose hearts 
								    may have been wanting to do right, but who died without ever 
								    having had an opportunity to hear of God's purposes or to 
								    learn what He expects of men." 57s These individuals are further 
								    described as having been sincere in their belief, but having lacked 
								    an opportunity to learn of righteousness from God. This oppor- 
								    tunity they will now receive. 57 " This group will include the peni- 

								    • r >«7 Ibid., p. 355. 

								    s«h Ibid. 

								    569 Religion for Mankind, p. 339. 

								    "70 Let God Be True, pp. 139. 263. 

								    571 You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 355-56. 

								    572 Paradise Lost, p. 218. 
								    ■ r >™ Ibid., p. 232. 

								    t"+ Ibid. 

								    ™ Let God Be True, p. 282. 

								    57B Paradise Lost, p. 202. 

								    577 Ibid., p. 233. 

								    57t< Ibid., p. 229. 

								    57» Ibid. 



								    114 Jehovah's Witnesses 

								    tent thief. 580 Along with him, billions of others will be brought 
								    back for this "resurrection of judgment.""' 81 These resurrections 
								    will be spread out over a long period so that people who have been 
								    raised earlier can help to get things ready for those who are yet 
								    to return. 582 

								    After this "resurrection of judgment" has begun, an ambitious 
								    educational program will be inaugurated. Those now raised from 
								    the dead must be taught the truth and shown what is right. 583 An 
								    extensive educational work will therefore be necessary to give in- 
								    struction in God's law to these unrighteous dead as they arise from 
								    their tombs. 584 During the millennium they will be learning 
								    righteousness from the Judge and through his earthly princes. 585 

								    The Day of Judgment. Jehovah's Witnesses speak of a "Judg- 
								    ment Day" for mankind; this day, however, is not to be a twenty- 
								    four-hour day but is to extend through the first thousand years of 
								    the new world. 588 " The inhabited earth which, according to Paul's 
								    words in Acts 17:31, is to be judged by Christ is not the present 
								    world (which has been judged and condemned at Armageddon), 
								    but the world to come, that is, the inhabited earth as it exists 
								    during the millennium. 587 Anyone not inhabiting the earth in the 
								    new world will therefore not be involved in this judgment. 588 
								    All those who will be on earth during the millennium, however, 
								    will be involved in this judgment, 589 which is also called a thousand- 
								    year day of test. 590 

								    The basis for this judgment will not be the lives people have 
								    lived before they died, but the works they perform during the mil- 

								    r,NI1 Ibid. To justify their position, the authors punctuate Lk. 23:43 as 
								    follows: "Verily I say unto thee this day. With me shalt thou be in Para- 
								    dise." 

								    •™' Ibid., p. 232. 

								    • r '^ Ibid. 

								    •™ Ibid., p. 229. 

								    584 Let God Be True, p. 270. 

								    ~ lKr < Ibid., p. 293. Note that nothing is said in this connection about the 
								    atoning work of Jesus Christ. The emphasis is all on doing right and learn- 
								    ing God's laws! Christ's ransom has provided the basis for their resurrec- 
								    tion from the dead, but their acquisition of everlasting life is dependent 
								    solely on their obedience to God's laws. 

								    580 ibid., p. 286. For proof the authors quote II Peter 3:8, "one day is 
								    with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day." 

								    5" Ibid., pp. 285-86. 

								    "'»» Ibid., p. 286. 

								    ™>' Ibid., p. 288. 

								    •"!••>« Make Sure of A il Things, p. 224. 



								    Doctrines 1 1 5 

								    lennium. 591 Armageddon survivors will be judged according to 
								    their faithfulness to God and Christ throughout the thousand-year 
								    judgment day; if they are approved, they will receive the right to 
								    eternal life. r ' 9:J Children born of Armageddon survivors will have 
								    full opportunity for life through Christ the King; they will also be 
								    judged on the basis of their works — any of them not desiring 
								    to serve Jehovah will be executed. ri9:! All those raised from the 
								    dead during the millennium will likewise be judged. Those raised 
								    in the "resurrection of judgment" will be judged according to what 
								    they do with the training they now receive; if they obey God's 
								    commands, they will get everlasting life; but if they do not obey, 
								    they will go into everlasting death. 504 

								    Jesus Christ the Right Shepherd died for them [those raised 
								    in the "resurrection of judgment"] not to put them on judgment 
								    for their past vile lives, but to provide for them a period of 
								      judgment in the new world in hope of their reforming and prac- 
								      ticing good things and deserving to be lifted up to human per- 
								      fection, thus to be judged according to their future works under 
								      the Kingdom. They will have the opportunity to become "other 
								      sheep" by listening to the voice of the Shepherd King and 
								      obediently following him, that he may gather them into the "one 
								      flock." 505 

								      In the case of some this judgment will result in annihilation. 
								      Those who refuse to obey God's kingdom, after a long enough 
								      trial, will be sentenced to everlasting destruction [annihilation] be- 
								      fore the end of the millennium. 5 " Risen ones who prove unre- 
								      formable or turn rebellious will be executed. 59T The vast majority, 
								      however, will pass the judgment-test and receive everlasting life 
								      on the new earth. r,!)K 

								      We see therefore that, according to Jehovah-Witness teaching, 
								      most of the inhabitants of the earth will have a second opportunity 
								      to make life's most momentous decision after they have died. The 

								      ■"'"i Ibid., p. 225; Let God Be True, p. 293. 

								      ™i Let God Be True, p. 290. 

								      -s" Ibid., p. 269. 

								      ™* Paradise Lost, p. 229. 

								      r,i,r ' You May Survive Armageddon, p. 356. Note once again that the 
								      ultimate basis for the salvation of these individuals is not the work of 
								      Christ for them but their "reforming and practicing good things." This is 
								      not salvation by grace but salvation by works! 

								      »»« Paradise Lost, p. 237. 

								      r>!>7 You May Survive Armageddon, pp. 356-57. 

								      »»" Let God Be True, p. 279. 



								      116 Jehovah's Witnesses 

								      Watchtower conception of the judgment day is radically different 
								      from that of historic Christianity since, as we have seen, the 
								      judgment is based, for them, not on deeds done in this life but 
								      on what is done during the millennium. s:m 

								      Satan's Final Battle. Though the "Day of Judgment" extends 
								      throughout the millennium, this is still not the last judgment; "the 
								      final judgment will not come until the end of Christ's thousand- 
								      year reign." 60 " At this point the King, Jesus Christ, steps aside 
								      to allow the Supreme Judge, Jehovah, to make the final test. 6 " 1 
								      This last test or judgment will occur by means of Satan's final 
								      battle. At the end of the millennium Satan and his demons will 
								      be loosed or released from the abyss in which they have been con- 
								      fined for a thousand years. 6 "- Satan, his mental attitude unchanged, 
								      will once again seek to usurp Jehovah's position of sovereignty over 
								      the universe, and will once again try to turn mankind against 
								      God. 003 He will use some sly appeal to selfishness, making people 
								      think they will be better off if they follow him. 604 This attempt of 
								      Satan will be a final test of obedience which everyone on earth 
								      will have to face — even the princes and the Armageddon sur- 
								      vivors. 805 The human race which thus faces its final trial is, it 
								      must be remembered, a perfected one. 808 

								      Sad to say, however, some of earth's perfected inhabitants will 
								      be led astray by Satan and will join him. 807 Satan, his demons, 
								      and his followers now assault the "camp of the holy ones," made up 

								      . r .9'j At this point we may well ask whether the Battle of Armageddon is 
								      really a revelation of God's justice, as the Witnesses claim. For is it not 
								      True that many of those killed in this battle have not had an opportunity 
								      to hear God's purposes or to learn what He expects of men? In the case 
								      of millions of these Armageddon victims, if they had happened to die one 
								      week — or, for that matter, one day — before Armageddon, they would 
								      have been among those raised in the "resurrection of judgment," and given 
								      a new opportunity to learn about God's kingdom. But, because they hap- 
								      pened to have the misfortune of living at the time of Armageddon, they 
								      were put to death without any hope of resurrection. Is this divine "justice"? 

								      «"<> Paradise Lost, pp. 237-38. 

								      001 N ew Heavens and a New Earth, p. 353. 

								      «'- Lei God Be True, pp. 270, 293. 

								      «>* Ibid., p. 270. 

								      «w Paradise Lost, p. 239. 

								      «»■"> Ibid., p. 238. 

								      fioe You May Survive Armageddon, p. 357. 

								      ,i0T Let God Be True, p. 270; New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 354, 
								      Another strange phenomenon! Earlier we saw that imperfect parents will 
								      be able, during the millennium to do a perfect job of training their children 
								      (above, p. 109). Now we observe that perfect people can still be led astray 
								      by Satan and can still rebel against God! 



								      Doctrines 117 

								      of perfect humanity, and the "beloved city," challenging Jehovah's 
								      sovereignty for the last time. 808 Fire comes down out of heaven, 
								      however, and devours all those who follow Satan. 809 All human 
								      rebels, all the demons, and Satan himself will now be cast into the 
								      lake of fire and sulphur, which stands for everlasting destruction. 610 
								      All these will be consigned to the "second death," which means 
								      annihilation. n " They will be as if they had never existed; "their 
								      cursed name will rot." 012 

								      Those who do not yield to Satan's temptation, however, and 
								      who thus pass this final test, will be declared righteous by Je- 
								      hovah, 61 ' 1 and will be given the right to perfect life on the para- 
								      dise earth forever." 14 Thus the inhabitants of the new world will 
								      receive what Adam lost long ago: everlasting life on a paradise 
								      earth." 1 r> The earth has now been finally cleansed, since everyone 
								      who would disobey Jehovah has been annihilated, and everyone 
								      who remains will have proved that he intends to obey God for- 
								      ever. 818 The great controversy that has raged throughout the uni- 
								      verse is now settled 817 ; Jehovah's sovereignty has now been ulti- 
								      mately vindicated! 

								      The Final State. As has already been implied, Jehovah's Wit- 
								      nesses repudiate the doctrine of eternal torment for the finally im- 
								      penitent, claiming that this doctrine is based on Satan's original 
								      lie in Eden. (l,M They advance four reasons why this doctrine is to 
								      be rejected: (1) it is wholly unscriptural; (2) it is unreasonable; 
								      (3) it is contrary to God's love; and (4) it is repugnant to 
								      justice. 01 " 

								      In this connection we should briefly examine Watchtower 
								      teachings about Gehenna, the New Testament word usually ren- 
								      dered hell in our English translations. In a note found on pages 
								      766-67 of their New World Translation of the Christian Greek 

								      008 New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 354. 

								      «<>u Paradise Lost, p. 239. 

								      010 Let God Be True, p. 270. 

								      «" Ibid., p. 293. 

								      fil2 New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 355. 

								      613 This is the final justification of the other sheep alluded to in n. 317, 
								      above. Remember that this is a justification based on works rather than 
								      on faith. 

								      014 Paradise Lost, p. 240; Let God Be True, pp. 280, 293. 

								      "in Paradise Lost, p. 234. 

								      «"> Ibid., p. 239. 

								      im New Heavens and a New Eartlt, p. 351. 

								      (il * Make Sure of All Things, p. 155. 

								      «'* Let God Be True, p. 99. 



								      118 Jehovah's Witnesses 

								      Scriptures, the authors explain that the word Gehenna is the Greek 
								      form of the Hebrew Gei-Hinnom, which means "valley of Hin- 
								      nom." This valley, which lay west and south of ancient Jerusalem, 
								      came to be the dumping place and incinerator for the filth of the 
								      city. Fires were kept burning there continually. The bodies of 
								      dead animals or of executed criminals were sometimes thrown into 
								      this valley; occasionally these bodies landed on a ledge, in which 
								      case they were devoured by worms which did not die until they 
								      had consumed the fleshy parts. No living animals were ever 
								      thrown into Gehenna. Hence, it is said, this place could never 
								      symbolize a region where human souls are "tormented in literal 
								      fire and attacked by undying immortal worms for ever and ever." 

								      Because the dead criminals cast here were denied a decent burial 
								      in a memorial tomb, which symbolizes the hope of a resurrec- 
								      tion, Gehenna was used by Jesus and his disciples to symbolize 
								      everlasting destruction, annihilation from God's universe, or 
								      "second death," an eternal punishment. 620 

								      The word Hades, as we have seen, 021 is interpreted to mean simply 
								      the grave. A further refinement is added to the definition of 
								      Hades, however, on page 155 of Make Sure of All Things: 

								      After Jesus introduced the truth about life and immortality, only 
								      the willfully wicked were spoken of as being in Gehenna, the 
								      expression Hades [translated "hell" in English] being applied to 
								      the dead in God's memory, those with opportunity or hope of a 
								      resurrection. 

								      Gehenna, therefore, is for Jehovah's Witnesses a symbol of an- 
								      nihilation — an annihilation from which there is no awakening, 6a - 
								      and no resurrection."- 3 People who are cast into Gehenna do not 
								      remain in the memory of God.' 1 - 4 Gehenna, "the second death," 
								      and "the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone" all stand for 
								      the same thing: total annihilation. °- r ' Such total annihilation is 
								      therefore the doom of the "goats" at the Battle of Armageddon - 6 ; 
								      of all those who will not be raised during the millennium; of all 
								      those who, though living on the new earth during the millennium, 

								      S20 p. 767. Cf. Let God Be True, pp. 95-96; Make Sure of All Things, 
								      p. 155. 
								      82i Above, p. 86. 

								      °-^ Make Sure of All Things, p. 155. 
								      «->3 Let God Be True, p. 96. 
								      c-M The Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 364. 
								      «m ibid. 
								      e '-M Let God Be True, p. 97. 



								      Doctrines 1 1 9 

								      refuse to obey God's kingdom 827 ; and of all who follow Satan in 
								      his final battle. 628 

								      Jehovah's Witnesses, however, do not claim to be denying the 
								      doctrine of eternal punishment; they insist that total annihilation 
								      is eternal punishment since it is total, final, and therefore eternal 
								      destruction. The authors of Let God Be True render the first 
								      part of Matthew 25:46 as follows: "These [the 'goats'] will depart 
								      into everlasting cutting-off [Greek, kolasis]. . . ," adding the com- 
								      ment, "So the everlasting punishment of the 'goats' is their ever- 
								      lastingly being cut off from all life." 82 " 

								      We see, therefore, that in the final state all who have rebelled 
								      against Jehovah and have refused to obey the laws of His kingdom 
								      will have been annihilated, and that only those members of the hu- 
								      man race and of the angelic hosts who have proved loyal to Je- 
								      hovah are still in existence. Let us now note what Jehovah's 
								      Witnesses teach about each of these remaining groups. 

								      The other sheep, including all who were raised during the mil- 
								      lennium and have passed the millennial tests, will remain forever 
								      on the renewed earth. 6H " These other sheep are not given im- 
								      mortality, but will continue to exist everlastingly, though still de- 
								      pendent on food. 831 No other creature in the universe can now 
								      cause their death. "It is in this sense that these loyal ones gain 
								      the endless world to come and can never die any more." 832 It 
								      must be remembered, however, that the "second death" is always 



								      °- 7 Paradise Lost, p. 237; You May Survive Armageddon, p. 356. 

								      *** Let God Be True, p. 270. 

								      e - 9 P. 97. This passage, as well as the entire question of the denial of 
								      eternal torment, is further discussed in Appendix E of The Four Major Cults. 
								      Note that, in this interpretation, no room is left for any gradation in the pun- 
								      ishment of the finally impenitent — a gradation which is clearly called for by 
								      Lk. 12:47-48. Cf. the position of the Seventh-day Adventists on this matter 
								      (The Four Major Cults, p. 142). 

								      630 This is taught despite the fact that in Rev. 7:9 the "great crowd" is 
								      pictured as standing "before the throne and before the Lamb," and that in 
								      verse 15 we are told that the members of the great crowd "are rendering 
								      him [God] sacred service day and night in his temple" (NWT). The 
								      Witnesses also teach, however, that the throne of God is in heaven rather 
								      than on earth (New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 16), and that the Lamb 
								      is now in heaven (above, pp. 90-91). They further teach that the temple 
								      at which the 144,000 have been united with Christ is in heaven (Let God 
								      Be True, p. 132). What Biblical basis, then, do Jehovah's Witnesses have 
								      for insisting that the "great crowd" of other sheep never gets to heaven 
									but remains eternally upon the earth? 

									« :)1 Make Sure of All Things, p. 243. 

									m - This Means Everlasting Life, p. 305. 



									120 Jehovah's Witnesses 

									within God's power to administer to possible rebels. a33 God does 
									not intend to transport these other sheep to different planets or to 
									heaven; He will keep them on the earth as expert gardeners to 
									maintain it as a glorious paradise. 634 This earth will never come 
									to a flaming end, as some scientists predict, but will endure for- 
									ever. 835 

									From this new earth all illness, sorrow, tears, and religious con- 
									fusion will have been abolished. 036 All men will obey God's com- 
									mands. 637 The purpose of life on this new earth will be the wor- 
									ship and praise of God and the unselfish service of man. 338 Love 
									will therefore prevail: "love first to God with all one's heart, 
									mind, soul, and strength, and love for one's perfect, godly neigh- 
									bor as for oneself." 639 Everyone will be eternally happy in the 
									paradise of the new earth. 640 

									What about the 144,000? The "resurrection" of the last of the 
									144,000, which has occurred during the millennium, will have 
									completed the marriage of Christ, the Lamb of God, to his bride. 341 
									It will be recalled that only the 144,000 and Christ are given im- 
									mortality, which is defined as follows: "Deathlessness, that is, the 
									life principle of the person possessing it cannot be taken away." 842 
									The 144,000 remain in heaven throughout eternity; they never 
									come down again to inhabit the earth. 843 They continue to reign 
									with Christ as his joint-heirs and co-rulers in Jehovah's glorious 
									theocracy. 644 The heavenly kingdom, consisting of Christ and the 
									"resurrected" 144,000, remains forever as the invisible or heavenly 

									033 New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 356; cf. This Means Everlasting 
									Life, p. 303. So there exists the possibility that even these finally perfected 
									inhabitants of the earth may still rebel against God! The above statement, 
									however, does not seem to agree with what we find on pp. 239-40 of 
									Paradise Lost: ". . . We can be sure that, when he [Jehovah] says that 
									everyone who is living on earth is worthy of life [after the final test], never 
									again will there be even i single case of rebellion or disobedience against 
									him anywhere on earth!" 

									034 New Heavens and a New Earth, p, 360. 
									°' M Ibid., pp. 356-67. 

									« 3 « Let God Be True, p. 271. 

									« : " Paradise Lost, p. 240. 

									838 New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 361. 

									639 You May Survive Armageddon, p. 361. 

									640 New Heavens and a New Earth, p. 360. 
									64i Ibid., p. 322. 

									6« Make Sure of All Things, p. 243. 

									li4a Let God Be True, p. 132. On the legitimacy of the view that the 
									anointed class remains eternally in heaven while the other sheep are on 
									the earth, see above, pp. 82-83. 

									844 i e t God Be True, p. 132. 



									Doctrines 121 

									part of the new world. 645 This kingdom will bring unheard-of in- 
									crease of blessings throughout eternity. 646 

									A word should be said about the continued existence of the 
									angels. The sentence of death pronounced upon the devil in 
									paradise proves that "holy angels, such as Satan had been up till 
									his rebellion, are not immortal, indestructible, but their living for- 
									ever is hinged upon their perfect obedience to God." 847 Theo- 
									retically, therefore, the holy angels can still be annihilated by God, 
									since it is possible that they may become disobedient. Since 
									angels are not immortal, they must be sustained by food. 648 

									We may summarize the Jehovah-Witness conception of the final 
									state in their own words : 

									Forever the new earth and the new heavens will remain in 
									tune in the unifying worship of the only True God and in the 
									unswerving love of righteousness. Perfect mankind's home and 
									its radiant sun and silvery moon will endure as long as God's 
									kingdom by Christ Jesus, the great Son and Seed of David, and 
									that is forever. 849 

									6*b ibid., p. 138. 

									« 4 « Make Sure of All Things, p. 233. 
									047 Survival After Death, p. 62. 

									648 Make Sure of All Things, pp. 247 and 243. See above, pp. 57-58. We 
									are not told what this food is. 
									849 N e w Heavens and a New Earth, p. 356. 



									IV. Appendix: Jehovah- Witness Teaching 
									on the Person of Christ 



									In the preceding chapter the teachings of Jehovah's Witnesses 
									about the person of Christ have been set forth. In this appendix 
									these teachings will be critically evaluated. It is important that we 
									do this, since the confession of the full deity of Jesus Christ and of 
									  His equality with God the Father has always been one of the 
									  distinguishing marks of Christianity. 

									  A Revival of Arianism 

									  A bit of historical orientation will first be in order. Essentially, 
									  the Jehovah-Witness view of the person of Christ is a revival of 
									  the Arian heresy of the fourth century a.d. Arius (who lived from 
									  approximately a.d. 280 to 336) and his followers (called Arians) 
									  taught that the Son, whom they also called the Logos or Word, 
									  had a beginning, that the term beget when applied to the genera- 
									  tion of the Son meant to make, and that therefore the Son was not 
									  of the same substance as the Father but was a creature who had 
									  been called into existence by the Father. 1 The Arians taught that 
									  there was a time when God was alone and was not yet a Father. 2 
									  Arius went on to ascribe to Christ only a subordinate, secondary, 
									  created divinity. 3 He asserted that such titles as God or Son of 

									  i J. N. D. Kelly, Early Christian Doctrines (London: Adam & Chas. 
									  Black, 1958), pp. 227-28. 

									  - Reinhold Seeberg, Textbook of the History of Doctrines, trans. Chas. 
									  Hay (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1954), I, 203. 

									  s D. S. Schaff, "Arianism," in The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of 
									  Religions Knowledge (Grand Rapids: Baker, reprinted 1960), I, 281. 

									  122 



									  Appendix: Teaching on the Person of Christ 123 

									  God when applied to Christ were mere courtesy titles: " 'Even if 
									  He is called God,' wrote Arius, 'He is not God truly, but by 
									  participation in grace. ... He too is called God in name only.' ' M 
									  Up to this point, there is virtual identity between the teachings of 
									  Arius and those of present-day Jehovah's Witnesses on the person 
									  of Christ. 

									  It should be borne in mind, however, that there are also differ- 
									  ences between Arian teachings and those of the Watchtower. 
									  Among these differences the following may be mentioned: Arius 
									  and the Arians taught that Christ, the created being through whom 
									  God made the world, did in the course of time assume a human 
									  body, though this was a human body without a rational soul. 5 
									  Thus Arius would not agree with Jehovah's Witnesses that Christ, 
									  who was a created angel, became a mere man and ceased to be an 
									  angel while he was on earth. Arius held that Christ continued to 
									  be the Logos during his stay on earth but assumed a human body 
									  and directed its activities; the Logos thus took the place of the 
									  human soul in the being which resulted from this union. Arius 
									  would therefore repudiate the discontinuity between Christ's pre- 
									  human and human stages which is implicit in Jehovah-Witness 
									  Christology. Further, Arius did not deny the personality of the 
									  Holy Spirit. He taught that the Holy Spirit was an "hypostasis" or 
									  person, but that his essence was utterly unlike that of the Son. 
									  The later Arians amplified this thought so as to teach that the 
									  Holy Spirit was the noblest of the creatures produced by the 
									  Son at the Father's bidding. 8 While denying the deity of the Holy 
									  Spirit, therefore, the Arians did not deny His personality, as 
									  Jehovah's Witnesses do. 7 

									  On the basic question, however, of the equality of the Son to 
									  the Father, the Witnesses take the Arian position: the Son is not 
									  equal to the Father but was created by the Father at a point in 
									  time. As is well known, the church rejected the Arian position 
									  at the Council of Nicaea in a.d. 325. The Nicene Creed, drafted by 
									  this council and accepted universally by Christians today, made 
									  the following affirmation about the deity of Christ: 

									  4 Kelly, op. cit., p. 229. The quotation is from Athanasius' Contra Ari- 
									  anos, I, 6. 

									  • r > Kelly, op. cit., pp. 281, 283. 

									  Ibid., pp. 255-56. 

									  7 It could therefore be observed that, though Jehovah's Witnesses are 
									  basically Arian in their view of Christ and the Trinity, they are actually 
									  more heretical than the Arians were. 



									  1 24 Jehovah's Witnesses 

									  We believe ... in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, be- 
									  gotten from the Father, only-begotten, that is, from the substance 
									  of the Father . . . begotten not made, of one substance with the 
									  Father. . . . 8 

									  Specifically directed against the Arians was the closing state- 
									  ment: 

									  But as for those who say, There was when He was not, and, 
									  Before being born He was not, and that He came into existence 
									  out of nothing, or who assert that the Son of God is from a dif- 
									  ferent . . . substance, or is created, or is subject to alteration or 
									  change — these the Catholic [that is, universal] Church anathe- 
									  matizes. 6 

									  By assuming once again the Arian position on the person of 
									  Christ, Jehovah's Witnesses have separated themselves from his- 
									  toric Christianity. Since the Watchtower Christology is essential- 
									  ly Arian, it may be noted that one finds in the writings of Athana- 
									  sius (295-373 a.d.), the arch-enemy of Arianism, an effective 
									  refutation of the teachings of the Witnesses about the person 
									  of Christ. 10 Note, for example, the following statement: "Those 
									  who call these men [the Arians] Christians are in great and grievous 
									  error, as neither having studied Scripture, nor understanding 
									  Christianity at all, and the faith which it contains." 11 He adds 
									  that to call the Arians Christians is equivalent to calling Caiaphas a 
									  Christian and to reckon Judas as still among the apostles. 12 
									  Athanasius further comments that, though the Arians use Scrip- 
									  tural language, and frequently quote Scripture, their doctrine is 
									  thoroughly unscriptural u — a statement which could with equal 
									  propriety be made about Jehovah's Witnesses today. At another 
									  place he accuses the Arians of harboring the same error as that 

									  » Kelly, op. cit., p. 232. 
									  9 Ibid. 

									  10 A number of these works are to be found in Vol. IV of the Nicene and 
									  Posl-Nicene Fa/hers, Second Series. Among the more important of these 
									  are On the Incarnation of the Word, and the Four Discourses Against the 
									  Arians, both of which are contained in Vol. IV. As one reads the latter 
									  work, one is struck again and again by the similarities between Arianism 
									  and Watchtower teachings. 

									  11 Four Discourses Against the Arians (trans, by Cardinal Newman), 
									  Discourse I. Section 1, in Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers (Grand Rapids: 
									  Eerdmans, 1953), Second Series, IV, 306. 

									  12 Ibid., I, 2 (i.e., Discourse I, Section 2). 
									  is Ibid., I, 8. 



									  Appendix: Teaching on the Person of Christ 125 

									  of the Jews who crucified Jesus since the latter also refused to 
									  believe that Jesus was truly God, charging Him with blasphemy 
									  because He claimed to be equal with God. 14 Arians, Athanasius 
									  alleges, are cloaking Judaism with the name of Christianity. ]ii 

									  As can be expected, many of the Scripture passages to which 
									  the ancient Arians appealed are also adduced by Jehovah's Wit- 
									  nesses today: passages such as Proverbs 8:22, Colossians 1:15, 
									  John 14:28, Mark 13:32, and so on. A large part of Discourse 
									  I, all of II, and most of III are occupied with the task of refuting 
									  the Arian interpretation of these passages. Though present-day 
									  Biblical scholars would not agree with all of Athanasius's exegeses, 
									  much of what he says in these Discourses is still valuable for us as 
									  we encounter Watchtower misinterpretations of these and kindred 
									  passages. 

									  Appealing to John 1:3, which tells us that without the Word 
									  nothing was made, Athanasius asks, How then did the Word 
									  Himself come into being, if He was one of the "things that were 
									  made"? If, on the contrary, all things were made through the 
									  Word, the Son Himself cannot have been made, cannot be a mere 
									  created work. 16 Athanasius reveals the soteriological motive for 
									  his opposition to Arius when he says, "For if, being a creature, 
									  He [Christ] had become man, man had remained just what he 
									  was, not joined to God; for how had a work been joined to the 
									  Creator by a work?" 17 To the same effect is the following: 

									  But this would not have come to pass [the blessings of our fu- 
									  ture life in glory], had the Word been a creature; for with a crea- 
									  ture the devil, himself a creature, would have ever continued the 
									  battle, and man, being between the two, had been ever in peril 
									  of death, having none in whom and through whom he might be 
									  joined to God and delivered from all fear. 18 

									  Athanasius's point here is well taken: If Christ was only a crea- 
									  ture, as the Arians asserted, what guarantee have we that He 
									  really conquered the devil, who is also a creature, and that He 
									  truly united us to God? How can a mere creature deliver us from 
									  the power of another creature? The same devastating criticism 
									  can be leveled against the Christology of the Watchtower. 

									  '•* Ibid., Ill, 27. 
									  « Ibid., Ill, 28. 
									  i« Ibid., II, 71. 
									  i-t Ibid., II, 67. 
									  i» Ibid., II, 70. 



									  126 Jehovah's Witnesses 

									  Critique of Watchtower Exegesis 

									  We proceed next to examine some of the more important Watch- 
									  tower interpretations of Scripture passages bearing on the person 
									  of Christ. It will be remembered that the Witnesses claim to be 
									  guided only by the Word of God and not at all by the opinions of 
									  men. Let us see whether their use of Scripture in connection 
									  with the alleged creatureliness of Christ supports their claim. 19 

									  Old Testament Passages. Beginning with Old Testament pas- 
									  sages, let us look first at a text to which Jehovah's Witnesses 
									  appeal as teaching that Christ was a created being, Proverbs 
									  8:22. In What Has Religion Done for Mankind? this passage is 
									  quoted in Moffatt's translation, "The Eternal formed me first of 
									  his creation, first of all his works in days of old"; previous to 
									  this quotation the comment is made: "In the proverbs of wisdom 
									  he [Jehovah's only-begotten son] speaks of himself as wisdom and 
									  calls attention to his being a creation of the eternal heavenly 
									  Father."*' 

									  It is interesting to observe that the ancient Arians also used 
									  this passage to support their views of the person of Christ, 
									  utilizing the Septuagint translation of the verse, "The Lord created 
									  me (ektise) . . . ."- 1 So much did the Arians make of this 
									  text, in fact, that Athanasius felt it necessary to devote the major 
									  part of his second Discourse against the Arians to an exposition 
									  of this passage. -- 

									  Though Proverbs 8:22 figured largely in the Christological 
									  controversies of the early centuries, most modern interpreters 
									  agree that the purpose of the author of Proverbs here was 
									  not to give a dogmatic description of the "origin" of the Second 
									  Person of the Trinity, but rather to set forth the value of wisdom 
									  as a guide to be followed by believers. In pursuit of this pur- 
									  pose, the author presents a poetic personification of wisdom. By 
									  this personified wisdom the statement is made, "Jehovah possessed 
									  me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old." 2 * 

									  19 Needless to say, no attempt will here be made to give an exhaustive 
									  survey of the Biblical evidence for the deity of Christ. The material which 
									  follows is an endeavor to refute the type of Biblical interpretation the 
									  Witnesses adduce to support their view of Christ. 

									  20 P. 37. Cf. The Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 43, where a similar 
									  use is made of the passage. 

									  -'i Kelly, op. cit., p. 230. 
									  -- Discourse II, Sections 18-82. 

									  - H ASV. A marginal note appended to the word possessed reads: "or 
									  formed." The Hebrew verb here used, qanah, may also be rendered begat 



									  Appendix: Teaching on the Person of Christ 127 

									  The point of the passage is that wisdom is older than creation 
									  and therefore deserves to be followed by all. To use Proverbs 
									  8:22 as ground for a denial of the eternity of the Son — a 
									  doctrine clearly taught in the rest of Scripture — is to use the 
									  passage in an unwarranted manner. 24 

									  Isaiah 9:6 is commonly understood by Christians to be one of 
									  the clearest Old Testament attestations to the deity of Jesus Christ 
									  found anywhere. In the New World Translation it reads as 
									  follows: "For there has been a child born to us, there has been a 
									  son given to us; and the princely rule will come to be upon his 
									  shoulder. And his name will be called Wonderful Counselor, 
									  Mighty God, Eternal Father, Prince of Peace." It is acknowl- 
									  edged even by Jehovah's Witnesses that this passage predicts the 
									  coming Messiah. Yet the Witnesses evade the clear teaching of 
									  the passage when they say, "He [Jesus Christ] is a 'mighty God,' 
									  but not the Almighty God who is Jehovah (Isa. 9:6)."-" The 
									  fact of the matter is, however, that the Hebrew expression here 
									  translated Mighty God ('eel gibhoor) is also used in Isaiah 10:21, 
									  where the New World Translation has: "A mere remnant will 
									  return, the remnant of Jacob, to the Mighty God." It becomes 
									  clear from verse 20 of this chapter that the "Mighty God" 
									  to whom the remnant of Jacob is said to be about to return is 
									  none other than Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel. Yet precisely 
									  the same Hebrew expression, 'eel gibboor, is used in Isaiah 10:21 
									  and in Isaiah 9:6. If 'eel gibboor in 10:21 means Jehovah, by 
									  what stretch of the imagination may the same phrase in 9:6 
									  be interpreted to mean someone less than Jehovah? 

									  In this connection it ought also to be observed that the Hebrew 
									  word 'eel in [saiah usually denotes Jehovah, the only True God; 
									  when it does not do so (in 44:10, 15, 17; 45:20; 46:6), it is used 
									  to describe an idol made by men's hands. Surely Isaiah did not 
									  intend to say that the coming Messiah would be an idol god! 
									  It ought also to be noted that the expression 'eel gibboor is, in 
									  Old Testament literature, a traditional designation of Jehovah — 



									  (see C. F. Burney. "Christ as the ARCHEE of Creation," Journal of Theo- 
									  logical Studies, XXVII [1926|, 160-77). 

									  -' 4 Cf. Franz Delitzsch, Commentary on Proverbs, ail loc; W. H. Gispen, 
									  De Spreuken Van Salomo (Kampen: Kok, 1952), pp. 133-34; and Kenneth 
									  S. Kantzer. "Wisdom," in Baker's Dictionary of Theology (Grand Rapids: 
									  Baker, 1960), p. 554. 

									  •■*> The Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 47. 



									  128 Jehovah's Witnesses 

									  see Deuteronomy 10:17, Jeremiah 32:18, and Nehemiah 9:32. 26 
									  We are forced to conclude that Jehovah's Witnesses have not lis- 
									  tened to Scripture here, but have simply imposed their precon- 
									  ceived view of Christ upon the Bible. 

									  New Testament Passages. Probably the best-known New Testa- 
									  ment passage to which the Witnesses appeal is John 1:1, which 
									  is translated in the 1961 edition of the New World Translation 
									  as follows: "In [the] beginning the Word was, and the Word was 
									  with God, and the Word was a god." Note that the word God 
									  is capitalized the first time it occurs in the text but not the second 
									  time, and that in the second instance it is preceded by the indefinite 
									  article. The impression this translation intends to convey is that 
									  the Word (Jesus Christ) is not God but a god — not equal to 
									  Jehovah God but a subordinate deity. 

									  By way of refutation, it should be observed, first, that Jehovah's 
									  Witnesses thus take a polytheistic position, affirming that there 
									  exists, besides Jehovah God, someone who is a lesser god. This 
									  position is, however, in direct conflict with Scripture, which affirms 
									  in Deuteronomy 4:35, "You have been shown, so as to know that 
									  Jehovah is the [True] God; there is no other besides him" (NWT); 
									  and in I Corinthians 8:4, "We know that an idol is nothing in 
									  the world, and that there is no God but one" (NWT). How, 
									  then, can the Witnesses affirm that Jesus Christ is a god? To be 
									  sure, the New Testament does occasionally speak of gods other 
									  than Jehovah, but then only in the sense of False gods. So, for 
									  example, in Acts 28:6 the term a god (theon) describes what the 
									  superstitious inhabitants of Malta thought Paul was after they 
									  had observed that the viper did not harm him. 27 And in 
									  Galatians 4:8 Paul observes, "Nevertheless, when you did not know 
									  God, then it was that you slaved for those who by nature are not 
									  gods (theois)" (NWT). Do the Watchtower theologians intend 
									  to teach that Jesus Christ is a god in one of the two senses just 
									  described? Yet the only times the New Testament speaks of 
									  gods (theoi) other than Jehovah is when it is describing False gods 

									  -" The only difference between these expressions and the one in Isa. 9:6 
									  is the addition of the word gadool (meaning great), and of the definite arti- 
									  cle. In Isa. 10:21, however, the definite article is also missing; yet the 
									  reference is unmistakably to Jehovah. Cf. Delitzsch's Commentary on the 
									  Prophecies of Isaiah on Isa. 9:6. 

									  -" Cf. also Acts 14:11, where the multitude at Lystra is reported as say- 
									  ing about Paul and Barnabas, "The gods [hoi theoi] have . . . come down 
									  to us" (NWT). 



									  Appendix: Teaching on the Person of Christ 1 29 

									  or idols. -* By calling Jesus Christ a god, therefore, Jehovah's Wit- 
									  nesses are actually making themselves guilty of idolatry and 
									  polytheism. 

									  In an appendix found on pages 773-77 of their New World 
									  Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures (published in 
									  1951), the Watchtower editors explain why they have rendered 
									  John 1 : 1 as they did. They make clear that when the word theos 
									  (the Greek word for God) first appears in this verse, it occurs 
									  with a definite article {pros ton theon), whereas when it appears 
									  the second time, it does not have the definite article (kai theos 
									  een ho logos). The editors go on to justify their translation, 
									  "and the Word was a god," by saying, 

									  Careful translators recognize that the articular construction of 
									  the noun [that is, the construction in which a noun appears with 
									  the definite article] points to an identity, a personality, whereas 
									  an anarthrous construction [a construction in which a noun ap- 
									  pears without a definite article] points to a quality about some- 
									  one (p. 774). 

									  In refutation, let it be emphatically stated that this observation 
									  is simply not True to fact. In the article on theos in the most 
									  recent Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, it is said that 
									  theos is used in the New Testament "quite predominantly of the 
									  True God, sometimes with, sometimes without the article." 29 As 
									  a matter of fact, Jehovah's Witnesses do not follow the above- 
									  mentioned rule themselves in their New World Translation. In 
									  the very chapter in which John 1:1 is found, for example, the 
									  word theos occurs at least four other times without the definite 
									  article, and yet in each instance it is rendered God, not a god. 
									  In John 1:6 we read, in the New World Translation, "There arose 
									  a man that was sent forth as a representative of God; his name 
									  was John." Since the Greek has para theou (no definite article), 
									  the Witnesses, to be consistent with their observation about the 
									  function of the definite article, ought to translate: "sent from a 
									  god." Yet here they render the anarthrous theos by God. In 
									  verse 12 the expression tekna theou (again the anarthrous theos) 

									  '-'* It might be objected that in Jn. 10:34 and 35 the term gods (theoi) 
									  is applied to Old Testament judges. Yet surely the Witnesses do not in- 
									  tend to say that Christ is a god only in the sense in which these judges 
									  could be called gods since they affirm that Christ is superior to all other 
									  creatures. 

									  - 9 Wm. F. Arndt and F. Wilbur Gingrich, Greek-English Lexicon of the 
									  New Testament (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957), p. 357. 



									  1 30 Jehovah's Witnesses 

									  is rendered "God's children," and in verse 13 the words ek 
									  theou egenneetheesan are translated "born . . . from God." Why 
									  not "children of a god," and "born from a god"? In the 18th 
									  verse we read: "No man has seen God at any time." But the 
									  Greek again has the anarthrous theos: Theon oudeis heooraken. 
									  Why do the Witnesses not translate, "No man hath seen a god 
									  at any time"? The above makes clear that Jehovah's Witnesses 
									  do not really believe their own statement about the articular and 
									    anarthrous construction of the noun since they do not follow this 
									    rule in their own translation. We are compelled to conclude that 
									    they translate John 1:1 as they do, not on the basis of careful 
									    grammatical study of the Bible, but on the basis of their own doc- 
									    trinal presuppositions. 

									    In the particular construction in which theos occurs in the last 
									    part of John 1:1, it functions as a predicate noun preceding the 
									    copulative verb een, meaning was. The authors of the appendix 
									    alluded to above contend that the absence of the article before 
									    the predicate noun in John 1:1 indicates that the predicate noun 
									    designates merely the class to which the subject is referred and 
									    excludes the idea that the Word is the same God as the God with 
									    whom he is said to be (pp. 774-75). 

									    In reply, however, it should be observed that, according to a 
									    recognized Greek scholar, 

									    A definite predicate nominative has the article when it follows 
									    the verb; it does not have the article when it precedes the verb. 
									    . . . The opening verse of John's Gospel contains one of the many 
									    passages where this rule suggests the translation of a predicate 
									    as a definite noun. . . . The absence of the article [before theos} 
									    does not make the predicate indefinite or qualitative when it pre- 
									    cedes the verb; it is indefinite in this position only when the con- 
									    text demands it. The context makes no such demand in the 
									    Gospel of John, for this statement cannot be regarded as strange 
									    in the prologue of the gospel which reaches its climax in the 
									    confession of Thomas [John 20:28, "My Lord and my God"J. :!0 

									    In the light of Colwell's rule, a definite article is not needed before 
									    the second theos in John 1 : 1 in order to make it definite. As a 
									    matter of fact, the Witnesses themselves testify to the validity of 
									    Colwell's rule in their translation of John 19:21, which in the 
									    New World Translation reads as follows: "However, the chief 

									    30 Ernest C. Colwell, "A Definite Rule for the Use of the Article in the 
									    Greek New Testament," Journal of Biblical Literature, LII (1933), 13, 21. 



									    Appendix: Teaching on the Person of Christ 131 

									    priests of the Jews began to say to Pilate: 'Do not write, "The King 
									    of the Jews," but that he said, "I am King of the Jews" '." 
									    Though in the earlier part of the verse the word for king has the 
									    definite article {ho basileus), in the latter part the word occurs 
									    without the definite article (basileus eimi toon loudaioon) . The 
									    construction here is quite parallel to that in John 1:1, since 
									    basileus is a predicate noun, preceding the copulative verb eimi 
									    (I am). In accordance with previous policy, therefore, the Watch- 
									    tower translators should have rendered these words: "I am a 
									    king of the Jews." Quite inconsistently, however, they here con- 
									    sider the predicate noun definite, though it lacks the definite 
									    article: "I am King of the Jews." Why, then, did they not con- 
									    sider the predicate noun definite in John 1:1? 

									    The answer is not difficult to find. Jehovah's Witnesses them- 
									    selves tell us why they have adopted their rendering of John 1:1 
									    on page 774 of the afore-mentioned appendix: 

									    ... It is presumptuous to say . . . that the sentence should there- 
									    fore be translated "and the Word was God." That would mean 
									    that the Word was the God with whom the Word was said to be. 
									    This is unreasonable; for how can the Word be with the God 
									    and at the same time be that same God? 31 

									    It has thus become clear that the ultimate ground for the Wit- 
									    nesses' translation of this important passage is not the authority 
									    of Scripture, but their own rationalistic, anti-Trinitarian theology. 
									    What they are saying, in effect, is this: we refuse to accept as 
									    Scriptural what our minds cannot grasp! 

									    At this time the reader's attention is called to what is perhaps 
									    the most scholarly refutation of Watchtower teachings on the 
									    person of Christ ever penned: The Jehovah's Witnesses and Jesus 
									    Christ, by Bruce M. Metzger, Professor of New Testament Lan- 
									    guage and Literature at Princeton Theological Seminary. 32 In 
									    this twenty-page article Professor Metzger adduces several Scrip- 
									    ture passages which prove the full deity of Jesus Christ and then 
									    proceeds to attack the Jehovah-Witness translations and exegeses 

									    31 Trinitarians would reply that, though the relationship between the 
									    Father and the Son is not rationally explicable, it is nevertheless not con- 
									    trary to reason. If the Triune God consists of three Persons in one Being, 
									    the Son can be both with God and God. 

									    :1 - Originally published in the April, 1953, issue of Theology Today, this 
									    article has been reprinted in pamphlet form and may be obtained from the 
									    Theological Book Agency, Princeton, N. J., at 15 cents per copy, or eight 
									    copies for one dollar. 



									    1 32 Jehovah's Witnesses 

									    of a number of New Testament passages dealing with the person 
									    of Christ. Anyone desiring a competent evaluation of Watch- 
									    tower exegetical methods should obtain a copy of Metzger's 
									    article. 

									    Professor Metzger shows, for example, on pages 76-77 of this 
									    article that the Witnesses have without any warrant whatever in- 
									    serted the word other four times into their translation of Colossians 
									    1:15-17. The latter part of the 16th verse, for example, which 
									    in the American Standard Version reads as follows, "all things 
									    have been created through him, and unto him," has been trans- 
									    lated by Jehovah's Witnesses as follows: "All other things have 
									    been created through him and for him." Since the word other 
									    is not found in the Greek text in any one of these places, Metzger 
									    concludes that the word has simply been inserted by the translators 
									    "in order to make the passage refer to Jesus as being on a par with 
									    other created things." We see again that the Witnesses have 
									    smuggled their own theology into their translations/ 18 

									    On page 78 one will find a discussion of the Watchtower trans- 
									    lation of Philippians 2:6, "Who [Christ], although he was existing 
									    in God's form, gave no consideration to a seizure, namely, that 
									    he should be equal to God." The impression given by this trans- 
									    lation is that Christ was not equal to God and even scorned such 
									    an equality. Metzger proceeds to show that this translation rests 
									    upon a misunderstanding of the Greek. 

									    Next Dr. Metzger indicates that the New World Translation 
									    obscures the clear attestation of two New Testament passages to 
									    the deity of Christ: Titus 2: 13 and II Peter 1 : 1 (p. 79). He cites 
									    Granville Sharp's rule, that when a Greek kai (and) "connects 
									    two nouns of the same case, if the article precedes the first noun 
									    and is not repeated before the second noun, the latter always 
									    refers to the same person that is expressed or described by the 
									    first noun." On the basis of this principle of Greek grammar, 
									    Metzger contends that Titus 2:13 should be translated, "the 

									    w.', Whereas in the 1951 ed. of the New World Translation of the Christian 
									    Greek Scriptures the word other was simply inserted into the text without 
									    any punctuation marks, in the revised ed. of 1961 brackets have been placed 
									    around the word other in these four instances. On p. 6 of the latter ed. 
									    we read. "Brackets enclose words inserted to complete or clarify the sense 
									    in the English text." Though the addition of brackets makes it clear that 
									    the word other is not found in the original, the retention of the word in 
									    the revised edition indicates that the interpretation underlying this mis- 
									    translation has not been repudiated. 



									    A ppendix: Teaching on the Person of Christ 133 

									    appearing of the glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ"; 
									    and that II Peter 1 : 1 should be rendered, "the righteousness of 
									    our God and Saviour Jesus Christ."* 4 

									    On pages 79-80 Metzger criticizes the New World rendering of 
									    Revelation 3:14, which makes the exalted Christ refer to him- 
									    self as "the beginning of the creation by God." He points out 
									    that "by God" would have required the preposition hupo, whereas 
									    the Greek has the genitive case, iou Theou, which means of God 
									    and not by God. The passage, Metzger concludes, does not teach 
									    that Christ was created by God but rather that He is the origin 
									    or primary source of God's creation. 

									    On pages 81-82 Metzger takes up passages which seem to 
									    teach a subordination of the person of the Son to the Father. 
									    He makes clear, for example, that John 14:28, "My Father is 
									    greater than I," does not intend to picture a permanent subor- 
									    dination of the Son to the Father, but rather describes Christ's 
									    condition while in the state of humiliation in contrast to the 
									    celestial glory which He was about to receive. 

									    Christ as the Son of God. The most recent Jehovah-Witness 
									    publication in which their view of the person of Christ is set 
									    forth and defended is a 64-page booklet published in 1962, 
									    entitled "The Word" — Who Is He? According to John. Though 
									    much that is found in this booklet simply repeats what had been 
									    taught in earlier publications, one or two points made here will 
									    require some attention. The authors claim that the title Son 
									    of God, ascribed to Christ by John the Baptist, Nathanael, John 
									    the apostle, Martha, and the Jews, implied that Christ was not 
									    the Second Person of the Trinity but a person inferior to God the 
									    Father (pp. 19-20; 24ff.). In proof of this contention the 
									    authors adduce Christ's discussion with the Jews who had taken 
									    up stones to stone him, recorded in John 10. Though Jesus 
									    here said, "I and the Father are one," the authors contend, he 
									    did not claim to be equal to the Father, but rather claimed to be 
									    less than God (pp. 25-26). Though the Old Testament spoke of 
									    certain judges as "gods" (verse 35 of John 10, referring to Ps. 
									    82:6), Jesus, it is said, here only claimed to be the Son of God; 
									    hence the Jews were quite in error when they thought Christ was 
									    uttering blasphemy (pp. 27-28). 

									    :i4 It is significant to note that at both of these places the RSV, which 
									    some years ago was accused by certain conservative theologians of having 
									    liberal leanings, gives a clearer testimony to the deity of Christ than either 
									    the KJ or the ASV! 



									    134 Jehovah's Witnesses 

									    By way of refutation, it should first be pointed out that, ac- 
									    cording to John 5:18, the Jews sought to kill Jesus "because not 
									    only was he breaking the Sabbath but he was also calling God 
									    his own Father, making himself equal to God" (NWT). The 
									    Jews, therefore, did not understand the expression Son of God 
									    as Jehovah's Witnesses apparently do. For the latter, the term 
									    means someone inferior to the Father. By the Jews of Jesus 1 
									    day, however, the term was interpreted as meaning full equality 
									    with the Father, and it was on account of this claim that they 
									    sought to kill him. :tr ' 

									    This point becomes quite clear when we compare John 10:33 
									    with 10:36. The former verse reads, "We [the Jews] are stoning 
									    you [Jesus], not for a fine work, but for blasphemy, even because 
									    you, although being a man, make yourself a god" (NWT). 3 * The 
									    latter passage reads, "Do you say to me whom the Father sancti- 
									    fied and dispatched into the world, 'You blaspheme,' because 1 said, 
									    I am God's Son?" (NWT). Putting together these two verses 
									    (if we translate verse 33 as in the standard versions), we see that 
									    Christ's calling himself the Son of God was interpreted by the 
									    Jews as a claim to equality with the Father. 

									    When Jesus was tried by Caiaphas, furthermore, He was asked, 
									    "By the living God 1 put you under oath to tell us whether you 
									    are the Christ the Son of God!" (Mt. 26:63, NWT). After 
									    Jesus had answered this question in the affirmative, the high priest 
									    is reported to have said, "He has blasphemed! What further 
									    need do we have of witnesses?" (v. 65, NWT). Obviously, the 
									    high priest understood the expression Son of God as meaning 
									    full equality with the Father since he called Jesus' assumption of 
									    this title blasphemy. If Jesus meant by the term Son of God 
									    something less than equality with the Father, He would by His 
									    affirmative answer be guilty of uttering an untruth, since for the 



									    '■'■■> According to Lev. 24:16 one who blasphemed the name of Jehovah 
									    was to be put to death by stoning. Since, in the eyes of these Jews, Jesus 
									    was a mere man, his claim to equality with the Father was considered 
									    blasphemy by them — a sin worthy of the death penalty. 

									    mi Here the NWT is quite misleading. In the light of John 5:18, quoted 
									    above, what the Jews accused Jesus of was the claim of being equal to 
									    Jehovah God. Though the definite article is missing before theon in 10:33 
									    (it occurs only in p (iB , prima /nanus), it is found in 5:18. where the reason 
									    why the Jews sought to kill Jesus is also stated: he made himself equal to 
									    God (ion theoo) . 10:33 should therefore be rendered as in the KJ. ASV, 
									    and RSV: "make yourself God." 



									    A ppendix: Teaching on the Person of Ch Hst 135 

									    Sanhedrin this title meant such equality. Surely if Jesus did not 
									    intend His words to be understood as meaning what the high 
									    priest and the rest of the Sanhedrin thought they meant, He could 
									    have and should have corrected their understanding of these words. 

									    When, after the trial before Caiaphas, Jesus appeared before 
									    Pilate, the Jews said to the governor, "We have a law, and ac- 
									    cording to the law he [Jesus] ought to die, because he made himself 
									    God's son" (Jn. 19:7, NWT). :,? Again it is crystal-clear that 
									    the Jews understood the expression Son of God, which Jesus 
									    acknowledged as descriptive of himself, as meaning nothing less 
									    than full equality with the Father. Is it likely, now, that present- 
									    day Jehovah's Witnesses know better what Jesus claimed to be, 
									    when He called Himself the Son of God, than the Jews who were 
									    His contemporaries? 

									    Christ as the Proper Object of Worship. What do Jehovah's 
									    Witnesses do with what is perhaps the clearest direct affirmation 
									    of the deity of Christ in the New Testament, the words of Thomas 
									    to the risen Jesus, "My Lord and my God"? Four pages of 
									    "The Word" — Who is He? According to John are devoted to an 
									    exposition of this passage (pp. 48-51). Before evaluating the 
									    interpretation of this text found in this booklet, however, we must 
									    first observe what the rest of the New Testament teaches about 
									    Christ as a proper object of worship. 

									    The Greek word proskuneoo, usually translated worship, is 
									    used some sixty times in the New Testament. It may occasionally 
									    designate the deference given by one man to another who is his 
									    superior, as in Matthew 18:26, where the RSV translates "im- 
									    ploring him." The word is used in Revelation 3:9 to describe 
									    the honor which will be rendered to the church at Philadelphia 
									    by those who were of the synagogue of Satan. :,;< 

									    The word proskuneoo is, however, much more frequently used 
									    to describe the worship of God. It is so used in the following 
									    passages: Matthew 4:10, Luke 4:8, John 4:21-24, I Corinthians 
									    14:25, Revelation 4:10, 7:11, 14:7, 19:4, 10, 22:9. Christ 
									    Himself, in fact, affirms with unmistakable clarity that worship 
									    in the sense of religious veneration may be offered to God alone. 

									    37 Why in this instance the NWT does not capitalize the word son, where- 
									    as in Mt. 26.63, giving the high priest's question to Jesus, the word son 
									    is capitalized, we are not told. 

									    :!S Lenski, however, is of the opinion that proskuneoo here designates 
									    the worship of the exalted Christ in the presence of the Philadelphian church 
									    (The Interpretation of St. Jolm's Revelation, p. 143). 



									    136 Jehovah's Witnesses 

									    For when the devil asks Jesus to fall down and worship him 
									    (proskuneoo), Jesus replies, "It is Jehovah your God you must 
									    worship (proskuneoo), and it is to him alone you must render 
									    sacred service" (Mt. 4:10, NWT). :i " On the basis of these 
									    words of Jesus, therefore, it should be clear that, if Jesus Christ 
									    is not the same being as Jehovah, he may not be worshiped by 
									    men. Jehovah's Witnesses teach that Jesus Christ is not the same 
									    being as Jehovah. We should therefore expect to find the New 
									    Testament forbidding the worship of Christ. On the contrary, 
									    however, we find that in the New Testament the worship of 
									    Christ is not only permitted but praised. 

									    By way of negation, we should observe that the worship of 
									    certain individuals other than Jehovah or Christ is specifically 
									    forbidden. As we just saw, Jesus refused to worship the devil. 
									    In the book of Revelation the worship of the beast — an 
									    apocalyptic symbol of anti-Christian worldly power — is con- 
									    sidered the epitome of rebellion against God, punishable by ever- 
									    lasting torment (Rev. 14:9-11). In three specific instances in 
									    the New Testament, worship is offered to individuals only to be 
									    rejected by them. When Cornelius falls down to worship Peter, the 
									    latter declines to be so honored, saying, "I myself am also a man" 
									    (Acts 10:25-26, NWT). When John the Apostle falls down to 
									    worship the one who has been speaking to him, the latter says, "Be 
									    careful! Do not do that! All I am is a fellow slave of you and 
									    of your brothers who have the work of witnessing to Jesus. Wor- 
									    ship God" (Rev. 19:10, NWT). 40 And when John again 
									    falls down in worship, this time before the feet of the angel that 
									    had been showing him the things he had seen, the angel says, 
									    "Be careful! Do not do that! All I am is a fellow slave of you 
									    and of your brothers who are prophets and of those who are 
									    observing the words of this scroll. Worship God" (Rev. 22:9, 
									    NWT). Note that in the last two passages it is explicitly asserted 
									    that John may not worship creatures but may worship only God! 41 

									    :l!l Jesus is here quoting Dent. 6:13, where the Hebrew has Yahweh Eloo- 
									    heykha, Jehovah your God. In both the Matthew passage and the parallel 
									    passage in Luke (4:8). in fact, Christ is reported as having added a word 
									    which does not occur in the Hebrew: the word alone (NWT) or only 
									    (KJ, ASV, & RSV). Christ thus makes the command even more explicitly 
									    exclusive than it is in Deuteronomy 

									    40 Some commentators hold that the individual here spoken of is an angel, 
									    whereas others suggest that he was a fellow man. In either interpretation, 
									    he was only a creature; hence John was not permitted to worship him. 

									    41 In each passage alluded to in the above paragraph, the Greek word for 
									    worship is proskuneoo. 



									    Appendix: Teaching on the Person of Christ 137 

									    What, now, about Jesus Christ? Is there any indication in the 
									    New Testament that Christ prohibited people from worshiping 
									    him, as Peter did and as the angel did? Did Christ ever say to 
									    anyone: "Do not worship me, for I am only a creature. Worship 
									    God but do not worship me"? There is no such indication. On 
									    the contrary, we find numerous instances where people do worship 
									    Christ; in some of these the worship is commended or recognized 
									    as evidence of True faith, and in none of these is this worship for- 
									    bidden. 

									    Let us look at some of these instances. The leper described in 
									    Matthew 8:2 worshiped Jesus (ASV). 4 - A ruler, identified by the 
									    other Synoptists as Jairus, is reported as worshiping Jesus (Matt. 
									    9:18, ASV). After Jesus had walked on the water and had 
									    quieted the wind, the disciples are said to have worshiped him, 
									    saying, "Of a truth thou art the Son of God" (Mt. 14:33, 
									    ASV). 4;i The Canaanitish woman worshiped Jesus, saying, "Lord, 
									    help me" (Mt. 15:25, ASV). The man born blind, having 
									    been informed by Jesus that He was the Son of man, said, "Lord, 
									    I believe. And he worshiped him" (Jn. 9:35, 38, ASV). 44 

									    4 - The NWT here renders the verb proskuneoo as doing obeisance, though 
									    in many of the passages previously discussed it rendered this verb with the 
									    word worship. On p. 9 of the 1951 ed. of the New World Translation of 
									    the Christian Greek Scriptures, it is said, "To each major word [of the New 
									    Testament] we have assigned one meaning and have held to that meaning 
									    as far as the context permitted." In the case of the word proskuneoo, 
									    however, the translators of the NWT have not assigned the same meaning 
									    throughout: sometimes they render this word worship, and sometimes do 
									    obeisance. It will be granted, of course, that there are instances in the 
									    New Testament where proskuneoo does not mean worship in the full 
									    sense of the word (e.g., in Mt. 18:26, in Mk. 15:19. and probably in 
									    Rev. 3:9). But the question is whether Jehovah's Witnesses are warranted 
									    in using the weaker expression, do obeisance, in every instance where pros- 
									    kuneoo is used in connection with Jesus (except in Heb. 1:6, where even 
									    the NWT has worship). One suspects that it is not grammatical but theo- 
									    logical considerations which have led them to translate the verb in this way. 

									    48 Though the NWT again has did obeisance rather than worship, it is 
									    quite clear that the honor shown to Christ by the disciples at this time was 
									    not mere deference to a superior creature, but the worship of one recognized 
									    as equal to God. Earlier Matthew had recorded the words of the Father 
									    at Jesus' baptism : "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" 
									    (3:17). In the light of these earlier words, in the light of Jewish monothe- 
									    ism, and in the light of what was said about the Jewish understanding of the 
									    expression Son of God, surely nothing less could have been meant here 
									    than the worship of Christ as one who was God! 

									    44 Though the ASV text here has Son of God, Son of man is found in 
									    the older mss., and is therefore the better reading. It is quite evident from 
									    the context, however, that what is denoted here by proskuneoo is not mere 
									    respect for a person in authority, but religious worship — worship which 
									    is, in fact, an act of faith. 



									    138 Jehovah's Witnesses 

									    After Jesus' resurrection, the women who ran from the empty tomb 
									    and the disciples on the mountain in Galilee are said to have 
									    worshiped Him (Mt. 28:9 and 17, ASV). In each of the above 
									    instances the same word is used which is used of the worship of 
									    God: proskuneoo. In each of the above instances Jesus willingly 
									    receives the worship rendered to Him, and in no case does He 
									    tell anyone not to worship Him. And yet this is the same Jesus 
									    who had said to Satan, "Thou shalt worship {proskuneoo) the 
									    Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve" (Mt. 4:10, 
									    ASV). And the same New Testament which clearly forbids 
									    the worship of a creature — even of an angelic creature — both 
									    permits and approves the worship of Jesus Christ. Surely here 
									    is clear proof of Christ's deity! 

									    To all of this Jehovah's Witnesses might reply: the obeisance 
									    which was shown to Jesus by these various individuals was only 
									    a kind of respect shown to a superior creature, and does not imply 
									    that Jesus was God. How shall we answer this objection? 

									    It will be granted that the word proskuneoo when used by 
									    New Testament writers does not always designate the adoration 
									    of God. As we have seen, it may occasionally be used of an act 
									    of respect paid to a creature. But it is clear from Jesus' own 
									    words, as recorded in Matthew 4:10, that when proskuneoo 
									    designates an act of religious veneration, it means worship, and 
									    that such worship as is described by this word may be offered 
									    only to God. And it will also be clear to anyone who takes 
									    the trouble to study the instances just enumerated that the act 
									    described in these passages by proskuneoo was nothing less than 
									    religious veneration. 45 

									    It should further be noted that, according to Watchtower 
									    teaching, Jesus Christ while on earth was only a man, the exact 
									    equivalent of Adam before the fall. 4fl When Peter told Cornelius 
									    not to worship him (Acts 10:25-26), the former gave as his 
									    reason for refusing this worship: "I myself am also a man" 

									    4r > Though this is not specifically stated in the instances of the leper and 
									    of Jairus, it will be remembered that both of these men prostrated them- 
									    selves before Jesus because they believed that He could perform a miracle 
									    for them. Though this act may not yet have been an expression of True, 
									      saving faith at that moment, it was certainly an act of religious veneration 
									      in each case. One might counter by saying that the apostles, who were only 
									      human, also performed miracles. True, but people did not prostrate them- 
									      selves before the apostles in worship. When one person began to do so, he 
									      was rebuked (Acts 10:25-26). 

									      46 See above, pp. 63-64, 66. 



									      Appendix: Teaching on the Person of Christ 139 

									      (NWT). Here the New World Translation renders proskuneoo 
									      with did obeisance. If, now, Peter had to tell someone not to do 
									      obeisance to him because he was only a man, by what right 
									      could Jesus Christ, who according to Watchtower teachings was 
									      only a man, receive obeisance from people without rebuking them? 

									      After Jesus' resurrection, so the Witnesses teach, he became a 
									      spirit-creature, higher in status than he had been when he lived 
									      on earth as a man, but still only a creature. The life he now 
									      enjoys is not the life of a divine Person with a human nature but 
									      the life of an exalted angel called Michael. 47 In Revelation 22:9, 
									      however, the angel who had been speaking to John told the latter 
									      not to fall down and worship him {proskuneoo), but to worship 
									      (proskuneoo) only God. If Christ after his resurrection was only 
									      an angel — higher, to be sure, than the other angels, but less 
									      than God — how could he accept the worship (proskuneoo) of the 
									      women and the disciples without rebuking them? 

									      All these instances in which Jesus was worshiped come to a 
									      climax in the adoration of Thomas recorded in John 20:28. When 
									      Thomas saw Jesus the week after he had expressed disbelief in 
									      Jesus' resurrection, he said to Him, "My Lord and my God!" 
									      (NWT). If Jesus were not God, he should have rebuked Thomas 
									      at this point. Instead of rebuking him, however, Jesus praised 
									      Thomas, saying, "Because you have seen me have you believed? 
									      Happy are those who do not see and yet believe" (v. 29, NWT). 
									      Surely here is indisputable proof that Jesus recognized Himself 
									      to be God and not only permitted but encouraged believers to 
									      worship Him as such! 

									      What, now, do Jehovah's Witnesses do with this verse? On 
									      one occasion a Witness who came to the author's door affirmed 
									      that when Thomas said, "My Lord," he was looking at Jesus, 
									      but that when he said, "My God," he was looking up to heaven 
									      and addressing the Father. As Professor Metzger has pointed out, 
									      however, the introductory words make this interpretation impos- 
									      sible: "Thomas said to him [that is, to Jesus]: 'My Lord and my 
									      God!'" (NWT). 48 

									      In "The Word" — Who is He? According to John the Witnesses 
									      now grant that Thomas did say all of these words to Jesus. They 
									      go on to assert, however, that if Thomas had meant that Jesus was 
									      the only True God, Jesus would certainly have reproved him. Since 

									      * 7 See above, pp. 65-67. 
									      ** Op. cit., p. 71, n. 13. 



									      140 Jehovah's Witnesses 

									      Jesus did not reprove him, so they argue, Thomas could not have 
									      meant this (p. 50). What, then, did Thomas mean when he 
									      said to Jesus, "My God"? He meant what the Apostle John 
									      meant: that Jesus was the Son of God (20:31). John did not 
									      say that Jesus was God the Son; he only said that Jesus was the 
									      Son of God. By Son of God John meant a being who was not 
									      the Second Person of the Trinity but a created being inferior to 
									      the Father (pp. 50-51 ). 4!l 

									      This interpretation, however, is a bold attempt to evade the 
									      clear teaching of the passage. In refutation of the Jehovah-Wit- 
									      ness exegesis of John 20:28, I offer the following considerations: 

									      ( 1 ) What can the expression "my God" possibly mean other than 
									      "my True God"? As we saw above, the New Testament recognizes 
									      no True God beside Jehovah God; any god other than Jehovah is 
									      for New Testament writers a False god or an idol. Thomas, being 
										a Jew, was a strict monotheist; for him there was no God beside 
										Jehovah. When he said, "my God," he could have meant nothing 
										other than "my one and only True God." 50 

										(2) The argument the Witnesses use to bolster their inter- 
										pretation boomerangs against them. Here was a monotheistic Jew 
										saying to Jesus: "My God!" The fact that Jesus did not rebuke 
										Thomas but commended him for his faith proves decisively that 
										Jesus was equal to the Father, that He was Himself very God! 
										When thus understood, Jesus' willingness to be called God by 
										Thomas is quite in harmony with the testimony of the rest of 
										the Bible about Him, and with His willingness to permit men to 
										worship Him. 

										(3) That the Jehovah- Witness understanding of the expression 
										Son of God is erroneous, and that Son of God in John's Gospel 
										can mean nothing less than full equality with the Father, has already 
										been shown. There is therefore no contradiction whatever be- 

										49 The same general interpretation of this passage, though in greatly 
										condensed form, is found in The Truth Shall Make You Free, p. 266. 

										r, ° Though it is True that the definite article is found with theos in the 
										Greek of this passage (ho theos mou, the god of me), we cannot attach 
										decisive significance to its occurrence here, since the nominative used as a 
										vocative very often takes the definite article as a Semitic idiom (C. F. D. 
										Moule, An Idiom-Book of New Testament Greek, pp. 116-117; cf. F. 
										Blass and A. Debrunner, A Greek Grammar of the New Testament, trans. 
										R. W. Funk, Sec. 147, (3)). A. T. Robertson (A Grammar of the Greek 
										New Testament in the Light of Historical Research, p. 465) makes the same 
										admission. Yet the latter also says, on p. 462, "When Thomas said, 'Ho 
										kurios mou kai ho theos mou (Jn. 20:28), he gave Christ full acceptance 
										of his deity and of the fact of his resurrection." 



										Appendix: Teaching on the Person of Christ 141 

										tween Thomas' ascription of full deity to Jesus and John's state- 
										ment, "These [things] have been written down that you may 
										believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God. . ." (20: 3 1 , NWT) . 
										The Jehovah-Witness denial of the deity of Christ must there- 
										fore be rejected by all True believers as a heresy which cuts the 
										very heart out of the Bible. Athanasius put it well: "Jesus whom 
										1 know as my Redeemer cannot be less than God!" 



										Bibliography 



										Primary Sources: 

										Russell, Charles T. Studies in the Scriptures. 1 Vols. Brooklyn: 
										Watchtower Bible and Tract Soc, 1886-1917. 

										Rutherford, Joseph F. The following are his major books: 
										Children (1941). 
										Creation (1927). 
										Deliverance (1926). 
										Enemies (1937) 
										Government (1928) 

										The Harp of God ( 1921 ) . A doctrinal summary. 
										Jehovah (1934). 
										Life (1929). 
										Light (2 vols.; 1930). 
										Preparation (1933). 
										Preservation (1932). 
										Prophecy (1929). 
										Reconciliation (1928). 
										Religion (1940). 
										Riches (1936). 
										Salvation (1939). 

										Vindication (3 vols.; 1931 and 1932). 

										Note: Though Russell's and Rutherford's publications are re- 
										ferred to in Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose, the authori- 
										tative doctrinal guides for the movement today are the volumes 
										which follow. These books, published by the Watchtower Bible 
										and Tract Society since Rutherford's death, have no indication of 
										authorship. They are listed in chronological order. 

										The New World (1942). 

										The Truth Shall Make You Free (1943). 

										The Kingdom is at Hand (1944). 

										Theocratic Aid to Kingdom Publishers (1945). 

										142 



										Bibliography 143 

										Let God Be True (1946; revised in 1952). A summary of the 

										main doctrines taught by Jehovah's Witnesses. 
										Equipped for Every Good Work (1946). A survey of the contents 

										of the Bible books. 
										This Means Everlasting Life (1950). 
										What has Religion Done for Mankind? (1951). 
										New Heavens and a New Earth (1953). 
										Make Sure of All Things (1953; revised in 1957). A compilation 

										of Scripture passages on 70 topics. 
										Qualified to be Ministers (1955; revised and expanded in 1967). How 

										to study the Bible, how to conduct meetings, and how to witness. 
										You May Survive Armageddon into God's New World (1955). 
										From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained (1958). 
										Your Will be Done on Earth (1958). 
										Let Your Name Be Sanctified (1961). 
										All Scripture is Inspired of God and Beneficial ( 1963). 
										Babylon the Great Has Fallen! God's Kingdom Rules (1963). 
										Make Sure of A 11 Things; Hold Fast to What is Fine (1965). 

										A revised and expanded version of Make Sure of All Things. 
										Things in Which it is Impossible for God to Lie (1965). 
										Life Everlasting — in Freedom of the Sons of God (1966) . 
										Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation? ( 1967) . 
										Your Word is a Lamp to my Feet (1967). 
										The Truth that Leads to Eternal Life (1968). 
										Then is Finished the Mystery of God (1969). 
										Is the Bible Really the Word of God? (1969). 
										The Nations Shall Know that I am Jehovah — How? ( 1971 ). 

										The Watchtower Society has published a great number of booklets. 
										Four of the more important titles are listed below: 

										Defending and Legally Establishing the Good News (1950). This 
										96-p. booklet, written by Hayden C. Covington, general counsel for 
										Jehovah's Witnesses, gives advice to the Witnesses on legal pro- 
										cedures and lists court decisions upholding their legal rights. 

										What Do the Scriptures Say about "Survival After Death"? (1955). 
										96 pp. Discusses the immortality of the soul, and related ques- 
										tions. 

										Blood, Medicine, and the Law of God ( 1 961 ) . 64 pp. Deals with 
										the question of blood transfusion. 

										"The Word" — Who Is He? According to John (1962). 64 pp. John's 
										teachings about the Logos. 

										Official Greek Testament and Bible Translations: 

										Wilson, Benjamin. The Emphatic Diaglott. Brooklyn: Watchtower 



										144 Jehovah's Witnesses 

										Society, 1942 (first pub. in 1864). An interlinear Greek Testa- 
										ment, based on the recension of J. J. Griesbach (1806). 

										The New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures. Pub. in 5 
										vols.: Vol. I, Genesis through Ruth (1953); Vol. II, I Samuel 
										through Esther (1955); Vol. Ill, Job through Song of Solomon 
										(1957); Vol. IV, Isaiah through Lamentations (1958); Vol. V, 
										Ezekiel through Malachi (1960). 

										The New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures. First 
										pub. in 1950, rev. in 1951. 

										The New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. A rev. ed. of 
										the entire translation in one volume, without footnotes. Pub. in 
										1961. The latest official edition of the New World Translation. 

										Histories of Jehovah's Witnesses: 

										Jehovah's Witnesses in the Divine Purpose. Brooklyn: Watchtower 
										Bible and Tract Society, 1959. This is the official history of the 
										movement. 

										Qualified to Be Ministers (1955), pp. 297-360, contains a brief history. 

										Macmillan, A. H. Faith on the March. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice- 
										Hall, 1957. A history of the movement told in autobiographical 
										fashion by one of its leaders. 

										White, Timothy. A People for His Name. N. Y.: Vantage Press, 
										1967. An attempt to write an objective history of the movement, by 
										one who is sympathetic to the Witnesses, though not a Witness him- 
										self. Includes the development of doctrine as an integral part of the 
										history. 

										Reference Works: 

										Aid to Bible Understanding (197 4). 1700 pp. People, places, plants, 
										and animals mentioned in the Bible. 

										Watchtower Publications Index of Subjects Discussed and Scriptures 
										Explained, 1930-1960. Brooklyn, 1961. Indexes subjects treated 
										and Scripture passages commented on in all Watchtower publications 
										for these years, including periodicals. 

										  Yearbook of Jehovah's Witnesses. Published annually. Contains sta- 
										  tistics and service reports for the preceding year. 

										  General Works: 

										  books: 

										  Axup, Edward J. The Jehovah's Witnesses Unmasked. New York: 

										  Greenwich, 1959. 
										  Cole, Marley. Jehovah's Witnesses: The New World Society. New 



										  Bibliography 145 

										  York: Vantage Press, 1955. A highly sympathetic treatment, ac- 
										  claimed by Jehovah's Witnesses, but criticized by Martin and Klann, 
										  in an appendix to Jehovah of the Watch Tower, as not True to fact. 
										  Triumphant Kingdom. New York: Criterion Books, 1957. 



										  Czatt, Milton. The International Bible Students: Jehovah's Witnesses. 
										  New Haven: Yale University Press, 1933. Essay based on a doc- 
										  toral dissertation. 

										  Dencher, Ted. The Watchtower Heresy Versus the Bible. Chicago: 
										  Moody Press, 1961. A defense of Christian doctrines against Je- 
										  hovah-Witness perversions, by a former Witness. Makes much use 
										  of Scripture. Includes chapter on methods of approach. 

										  . Why I Left Jehovah's Witnesses. Fort Washington, Pa. : 

										  Christian Literature Crusade, 1966. An account of the author's rea- 
										  sons for leaving the Witnesses, together with a refutation of some Je- 
										  hovah-Witness doctrines. 

										  Duncan, Homer. Heart to Heart Talks with Jehovah's Witnesses. 
										  2nd ed. Lubbock, Texas: Missionary Crusader, n.d. A discussion of a 
										  number of Jehovah-Witness doctrines, for the purpose of persuading 
										  Witnesses to break with the movement. 

										  Grigg, David H. Do Jehovah's Witnesses and the Bible Agree? N. Y. : 
										  Vantage Press, 1958. A Biblical refutation of Watchtower doctrines. 

										  Gruss, Edmond C. Apostles of Denial. Philadelphia: Presbyterian 
										  and Reformed, 1970. 324 pp. A thorough, well-documented examina- 
										  tion and expose of the history, doctrines, and claims of the movement, 
										  by a former Jehovah's Witness who is now a professor of history and 
										  apologetics. Includes a discussion of Watchtower methods, suggestions 
										  for dealing with Jehovah's Witnesses, descriptions of splinter groups, 
										    and a personal testimony. The best recent one-volume treatment of the 
										    movement. 

										    Haldeman, I. M. Millennial Dawnism: The Blasphemous Religion 
										    which teaches the Annihilation of Jesus Christ. New York: Chas. 
										    Cook, n.d. (before 1914). A refutation of Millennial Dawnism — 
										    an early name for Russellism. 

										    Hebert, Gerard, S. J. Les Temoins de Jehovah. Montreal: Les Edi- 
										    tions Bell arm in, 1960. A critical study by a Jesuit father, treating 
										    history and doctrine. Lists every Watchtower publication from Rus- 
										    sell's time to the present. 

										    Martin, Walter R., and Klann, Norman H. Jehovah of the Watch 
										    Tower. Rev. ed. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1959. History, 
										    methods, and teachings; refutation of major doctrines. One of the 
										    more important secondary sources. 

										    McKinney, George D., Jr. The Theology of the Jehovah's Witnesses. 
										    Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1962. A systematic exposition of doc- 
										    trinal teachings. A competent work, though occasionally outdated 
										    quotations are used. 

										    Pike, Royston. Jehovah's Witnesses: Who They Are, What They 
										    Teach, What They Do. New York: Philosophical Library, 1954. 



										    146 Jehovah's Witnesses 

										    An objective treatment, more complete than most accounts on their 
										    eschatology. 

										    Rogerson, Alan. Millions Now Living Will Never Die. London: Con- 
										    stable, 1969. An account of the history, beliefs, and organization of 
										    the Jehovah-Witness movement by a former Witness. An attempt 
										    to give an objective answer to the question, "Who are Jehovah's 
										    Witnesses?" 

										    Schnell, Wm. J. Thirty Years a Watchtower Slave. Grand Rapids: 
										    Baker, 1956. A revealing account of the inner workings of the 
										    movement by one who was a Jehovah's Witness for thirty years. 
										    Makes a contribution no other book has made. 

										    . Into the Light of Christianity. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1959. 

										    Discusses and refutes the main doctrines of Jehovah's Witnesses. 

										    . Christians: Awake! Grand Rapids: Baker, 1962. Deals 

										    chiefly with methods of witnessing to Jehovah's Witnesses. 

										    Spier, H. J. De Jehovah's Getuigen en de Bijbel. 2nd enlarged ed. 
										    Kampen: Kok, 1971. Paperback, 191 pp. A competent analysis and 
										    refutation of the main doctrines. Includes a 19-p. glossary of Watch- 
										    tower terms. 

										    Stevenson, W. C. The Inside Story of Jehovah's Witnesses. N. Y. : 
										    Hart Publishing Co., 1968 (orig. pub. by Hutchinson of London 
										    [1967] under the title, Year of Doom, 1975). An evaluation of the 
										    movement from the inside, by one who was an active Witness for 14 
										    years. Includes such matters as the appeal of the movement, the inner 
										    working of the Watchtower Society, a critical discussion of Watch- 
										    tower teachings and practices, and suggestions on how to deal with 
										    Witnesses. More irenic than Schnell's Thirty Years a Watchtower 
										    Slave. 

										    Stroup, Herbert H. The Jehovah's Witnesses. New York: Columbia 
										    Univ. Press, 1945. An objective, scholarly study, based on a doc- 
										    toral dissertation. 

										    Thomas, F. W. Masters of Deception. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1972. 
										    A substantial Biblical refutation of the major Watchtower doctrines, 
										    by a layman active in evangelism. 

										    Whalen, Wm. J. Armageddon Around the Corner. New York: John 
										    Day Co., 1962. A Roman Catholic layman writes about the move- 
										    ment, touching on its history, theology, organization, court activi- 
										    ties, and schisms. 

										    pamphlets: 

										    (Note: These are inexpensive, and may be ordered in quantities 
										    for distribution.) 

										    Burrell, M. C. Jehovah's Witnesses. London: Church Book Room 

										    Press, I960. 20 pp. History, methods, and doctrines. 
										    Kneedler, Wm. Harding. Christian Answers to Jehovah's Witnesses. 



										    Bibliography 1 47 

										    Chicago: Moody Press, 1953. 64 pp. A brief exposition and refu- 
										    tation of the main doctrines. 

										    Martin, Walter R. Jehovah's Witnesses. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 
										    1957. 64 pp. History, doctrines, and practices. 

										    Mayer, F. E. Jehovah's Witnesses. St. Louis: Concordia, 1957. Rev. 
										    ed. (first pub. in 1942). 61 pp. Mayer was professor of systematic 
										    theology at Concordia Seminary. Leans chiefly on Rutherford; no 
										    reference to later publications. 

										    Metzger, Bruce M. The Jehovah's Witnesses and Jesus Christ. A re- 
										    print from Theology Today, Vol. X, No. 1 (April, 1953), pp. 65- 
										    85; obtainable from the Theological Book Agency, Princeton, N. J. 
										    Metzger is professor of New Testament at Princeton Seminary. A 
										    scholarly refutation of the Jehovah-Witness view of Jesus Christ. 

										    Strauss, Lehmann. An Examination of the Doctrine of Jehovah's 
										    Witnesses. New York: Loizeaux Bros., 1955 (first pub. 1942). 
										    47 pp. 

										    Talbot, Louis T. What's Wrong with Jehovah's Witnesses? Findlay, 
										    Ohio: Dunham Pub. Co. 50 pp. 

										    Tanis, Edward J. What the Sects Teach. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1958. 
										    89 pp. A brief critical treatment of Jehovah's Witnesses (and of 
										    Christian Science, Seventh-day Adventism, and Spiritism). 

										    Wassink, A. The Bible and Jehovah's Witnesses. Faith, Prayer, and 
										    Tract League; Grand Rapids, Mich. 49504. 18 pp. Outdated in some 
										    respects, but still useful. 

										    (Note: Some of the above pamphlets can be obtained from Religion 
										    Analysis Service, 2708 E. Lake St., Suite 231, Minneapolis, Minn. 55406) 

										    periodicals: 

										    Schnell, Wm. J., ed. The Converted Jehovah's Witness Expositor. 
										    Published every 3 months at 794 Terrace Road, Dunedin, Florida 
										    33528. The only periodical devoted exclusively to the refutation of 
										    Jehovah- Witness errors. 





										    Anthony A. Hoekema 

										    Anthony Hoekema's The Four Major Cults has 
										    gained wide acceptance as a reliable and useful 
										    e book of information on the beliefs and 
										    ces of Christian Scientists, Jehovah's Wit- 
										    nesses, Mormons, and Seventh-Day Adventists. 
										    flying on primary sources for his infor- 
										    mation — and in many instances obtaining cur- 
										    rent data directly from headquarters for the 
										    group — Dr. Hoekema insured the accuracy of his 
										    reports. 

										    These valuable studies are now avaiiafc 
										    individual paperbacks, updated by the author. 
										    Included in this volume is a brief history 
										    Jehovah's Witnesses, an expla their 

										    source of authority, and a systematic outline and 
										    presentation of their doctrines. Two - 
										    dealing with special point; 
										    complete bibliography of m& -sand 

										    pamphlets for ac - are aiso 

										    included. 

										    Ideal for classroc 
										    tion. these brief studies as well 

										    in discussion groups, and for individual 
										    reference. 

										    Anthony A. Hoekema is Professor of System- 
										    atic Theology at Calvin Theological Seminary, 
										    and is the author of several other books, includ- 
										    ing What About Tongue-Speaking? and Holy 
										    Spirit Baptism. 



										    ISBN O-8028-1469 



										    WM.B EERDMANS 
										    PUBLISHING C 

										    .VI 5£ LjH**»0 unfits uit.jp *a 

