TRACY NEFF, 
Plaintiff 



§ 
§ 



IN THE DISTRICT COlRT 



vs. 



§ 
§ 
§ 



DALLASCOUNT-VUT.K \S 



LANDMARKS EDUCATION 
CORPORATION AND DAVID GRILL, 
AN INDIVIDUAL, 
Defendants 



§ 
§ 



§ 



162nd JUDICIAL DISTRICT 



PLAINTEFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S 
MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT 



NOW COMES Plaintiff Tracy Neff, and files this Response to Defendant Landmark 
Education Corporation's Motion for Summary Judgment. Tracy Neff relies in support of her 
Response on the evidence indexed as Exhibit "A" to this Motion, which index is incorporated 
herein by reference, together with all pleadings and discovery on file, and would show unto the 
court as follows: 



This law suit 1 arises out of the brutal sexual assault of Plaintiff Tracy Neff by Defendant 
David Alan Grill ("Grill") which occurred in the early morning hours of February 3, 1995. Tracy 
Neff encountered Grill on the evening of the assault at a facility owned and operated by 
Defendant Landmark Education Corporation ("Landmark"), where Grill asked Neff to go to his 
apartment at 1117 South Akard so that he could "share" with her some traumatic events in his 
life. Deposition of Tracy Lynn Neff, Exh. "A- 10" hereto, hereafter "Neff Depo" at p. 238-39. 
After arriving a the Akard Street apartment, Grill began drinking heavily and according to his 
testimony, he consumed at least a half bottle of Scotch Whiskey. Deposition of David Allen 



1 Defendant Landmark has moved for Summary Judgment on only one issue — proximate cause — 
as to Plaintiffs negligence and negligent hiring and retention claims against Landmark. 
Defendant has also moved for Summary Judgment on Intentional Infliction of Emotional 
Distress. However, Landmark's Motion does not address Plaintiffs claims under the following 
additional theories pled by Plaintiff: Assault and Battery, Breach of Fiduciary Duty, Sexual 
Exploitation by a Mental Health Services Provider under Civil Practice and Remedies Code 
Chapter 81, Sexual Assault under Penal Code § 21.001, Fraud, Negligent Misrepresentation and 
Violations of the Texas Deceptive Trade Practices Act. Therefore, these causes of Action are not 
addressed specifically herein. 

PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 1 
s:\motions\3ieff.tra\msjresponsedraft3 



I. 

TRACY NEFF WAS BRUTALLY RAPED AND 
SODOMIZED BY DEFENDANT DAVID GRILL 



Grill, Exh. "A-7" hereto, hereafter "Grill Depo" at p. 228-229. Neff has testified that Grill first 
forced her to perform oral sex [Neff Depo at p. 245] and then led her to his bedroom. Neff Depo 
at p. 271. Once in Grill's bedroom, Grill brutally raped Neff with a dildo, and thereafter anally 
sodomized her. Neff Depo at p. 293-304. 

Grill was so intoxicated that he has no memory of the assault. Grill Depo at p. 228-229. 
He does not deny that the assault took place. Grill Depo at p. 291-292. Further, Grill has 
judicially confessed to sexual assault and specifically to "knowingly causing the penetration of 
the sexual organ of [Neff] ... without any consent..." See Judicial Confession, "Exh. A-8" 
hereto.; Grill Depo at p. 245. 

The following day, Tracy Neff reported the assault to the Dallas Police Department, and 
underwent a rape examination at Parkland Memorial Hospital which confirmed that a sexual 
assault had taken place. See Police Report, Exh. "A-5", Parkland Report Exh. "A-6". 
Subsequently, Tracy Neff underwent surgery to repair the damage done by Grill to her vagina. 
See Godat Records Exh. "A-7". Further, Tracy Neff has sustained severe and permanent 
documented psychological injuries, for which she is seeking recovery in this lav/ suit. 

II. 

LANDMARK EDUCATION CORPORATION NEGLIGENTLY 
HIRED AND RETAINED DAVID GRILL. WHICH 
WAS THE REASON TRACY NEFF MET GRILL IN THE FIRST PLACE 

At the date and time of the incident. Grill was employed by Defendant Landmark 
Education Corporation as the Center Manager of Landmark's Dallas facility. Deposition of 
Arthur Schrieber, Exh. "A-ll" hereto, hereafter Schreiber Depo at p. 91. Long before Tracy 
Neff ever met David Grill, Landmark knew or should have known that Grill was a danger to 
himself and to others who were students in their programs. 

A. Landmark Education Corporation Provided Interactive Group Therapy to Tracv 
Neff and Purported to Teach a "Breakthrough" in the Way Plaintiff Thought about 
the World 

Landmark is in the business of providing large group therapy self-help seminars to 
persons such as Tracy Neff. Landmark presents a seminar called the "Landmark Forum" which 
is their "basic" or introductory seminar. Shrieber Depo at p. 91. The Forum is based on 
"technology" developed by Werner Erhart, who presented the programs under the name EST 
until December, 1984 . Schrieber Depo at p. 89. Persons are asked to fill out a "forum 
information sheet" prior to attending the Forum, and list what "issues" they would like to address 
in their Forum experience. Participants are also asked whether they have had any mental health 
problems, or inpatient alcohol and/or drug treatment, and are asked to sign an "informed 
consent" before enrolling in the program. Schrieber Depo at p. 106. In the words of Landmark's 
own literature, the Forum is a truly earth-shattering experience for a participant: 



PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 2 
s:\motions\neff.tra\msjresponsedraft3 



This is the age of breakthroughs — of extraordinary leaps in science, in 
technology, in understanding that have vastly elevated our quality of life. The 
Landmark Forum is such a breakthrough, but a breakthrough in what is possible 
for people — a breakthrough in living. The Landmark Forum is a means of 
  gaining insight into fundamental premises that shape and govern our lives — 
  the very structures that determine our thinking, our actions, our values, the 
  kind of people that we can be. In the Landmark Forum, you get at the heart of 
  who you are — examining the basis of your identity, your personality, your 
  formulas for living, relating and achieving success. The Landmark Forum is an 
  invitation to move beyond the limits you have set for yourself, the constraints you 
  have imposed on your own life, breaking through to new levels of performance 
  and ability. Based on original theories and models of thinking, The Landmark 
  Forum challenges old assumptions and creates new tools to access those issues 
  that are most basic, most urgent to each of us. It is designed to bring about a 
  fundamental shift in what is possible in our lives. 

  See "The Landmark Forum, An Exceptional Opportunity," Exh. "A-2" 

  Some persons find this type of self-examination very difficult and rigorous. Schrieber 
  Depo at 121-123. Further, mental health professionals who have examined the program have 
  advised that it is not recommended for anyone taking anti-depressants, anyone enrolled in 
  therapy, or anyone who has had drag or alcohol counseling. Schrieber Depo at p. 1 1 1-1 14. 

  B. Landmark Negligently Allowed Grill to Interact with, and Manip ulate. Vulnerable 
  Women Including Plaintiff Tracy Neff 

  Despite $48 million in annual revenue in 1997, Landmark has a paid staff of only 
  approximately 275 persons worldwide. Schreiber Depo at 149. Landmark presents their 
  seminars through the widespread use of an "assistants program"— meaning that graduates of the 
  Forum are encouraged to volunteer their time to present the work to others. The viability of a 
  Landmark Center is directly related to the size and strength of its volunteer base. 

  Grill was hired on March 1, 1991 as the "center manager" of Landmark's Dallas facility. 
  Grill Depo at p. 148. When Grill was hired, Grill was told that he would be responsible for 
  running the day to day operations of the Dallas center [Grill Depo at p. 125], and was told that 
  the only qualification for a Dallas center manager for Landmark was to be "willing to do what it 
  takes... to get the job done." Grill Depo at p. 134. During the time he was manager of the 
  Dallas facility, he turned the center around, from being the worst of all of Landmark's facilities, 
  to being the number one center in terms of profitability and revenue. Grill Depo at p. 144-146. 
  In order to do this, he "brought in music" so that the volunteers would have fun, and made it a 
  point to socialize with participants in the Landmark programs. Grill Depo at p. 145-46. 

  Grill was expected to make participants feel welcome at the center, and made it a point to 
  meet all participants personally. [Grill Depo at p. 134-137] It was while engaged in this "meet 

  PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 3 
  5:\motions\neff.tra\msjresponsedraft3 



  and greet" function that Grill first met Tracy Neff, on the Sunday of her attendance at the Forum. 
  Neff Depo at p. 164. 

  In her original application to be a Forum participant, Tracy Neff clearly set forth that she 
  was in a vulnerable mental condition. Neff Depo at p. 26. She stated she was imcomfortable 
  with herself, having recently separated from her husband. Id. at p 27, Neff listed her goal as to 
  "become comfortable with myself and allow people to get close to me, to be comfortable with 
  my father and be able to discuss Ms homosexuality with him and ... to find the courage to 
  complete medical school..." Neff Application, Exh. "A-15". Tracy Neff also disclosed in her 
  application that she was "gang raped eleven years ago and used drugs and alchol [sic] to escape 
  the reality of what happened to me; I completed a program and learned to deal with it. . ." Id. In 
  the course of his duties as center manager, Grill read Tracy Neff s application containing all of 
  this personal information about her vulnerable mental state at the time she enrolled to take the 
  Landmark Forum. Grill Depo at p. 261. 

  Through her participation in the Landmark programs, Tracy Neff increasingly came into 
  contact with Grill. After initially meeting Grill at the Landmark facility on December 18, 1995 — 
  the last night of her Forum [Neff Depo at p. 164] — Tracy Neff knew that Grill was the head of 
  the Dallas center. Neff Aff., Exh. "A- 16" Further, she had an understanding that because Grill 
  was in management for Landmark, he had mastered the Landmark programs and philosophies of 
  dealing with life. Neff Aff., Exh. "A- 16". Neff Depo at 202-203 . Although Tracy Neff did not 
  have any personal interaction with Grill between December 18, 1994 and January 1, 1995, she 
  did see him at the Landmark facility, and other persons communicated to her that Grill was the 
  "most self-expressed" person involved with Landmark in the Dallas area, and that he was the 
  best example of the Landmark philosophies about how to live life without guilt. Neff Aff. , Exh. 
  "A-16"; Neff Depo at 202-203. 

  On January 1, 1995, Neff attended a party at the home of a high-level Landmark 
  volunteer, at which only Landmark staff, graduates and participants were in attendance. Neff 
  Depo at p. 390. In a private room upstairs, Neff and Grill had sexual intercourse, which Neff has 
  testified made her feel extremely uncomfortable. Neff Depo at pp. 159-60; 390-92. The 
  following day, Grill telephoned Neff, and she told him that she was not comfortable with what 
  had happened. 2 Grill urged her to "complete" with what happened at the New Year's Day event 
  by "sharing" with him at a face-to-face meeting. Thereafter, Grill explained to Neff that the 
  Landmark philosophy encouraged guilt-free living, and that Neff should not be ashamed to 
  express herself sexually with Grill. Neff Depo at 202-203. Tracy Neff believed what Grill was 
  saying because he was held out to her as a living example of the teachings and philosophies of 
  Landmark. 

  Thus, Grill was able to use the cloak of the philosophies of Landmark, as well as the 
  actual and apparent authority as the center manager, to manipulate and coerce Tracy Neff into the 



  2 Significantly, Tracy Neff had never given Grill her telephone number. Clearly, Grill had used 
  his position as center manager in order to access personal information about where to contact 
  Neff to arrange the face-to-face encounter of January 2, 1995. Neff Depo at p. 176-178. 

  PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 4 
  s:\motions\neff.tra\msjresponsedrait3 



  situation where he was able to rape her. Affidavit of Rick Ross Exh. "A-4" hereto; Over the 
  approximate month prior to the sexual assault, Tracy Neff continued to see Grill and interact with 
  him at the Dallas Landmark facility, and continued to be told that Grill was the best example of 
  the Landmark philosophies. 

  C. Landmark Education Corporation was Negligent in Hiring Grill in a Position 
  Where He Could Manipulate Vulnerable Women Such as P laintiff Traev Neff 

  As tragic as the assault on Tracy Neff has been, the greater tragedy is that Landmark 
  could have easily prevented the incident through proper' personnel procedures and actions. 
  Certainly, Grill's well-documented misdeeds 3 prior to February 3, 1998 made it clearly 
  foreseeable to Landmark that Grill was capable of rape or other behavior while intoxicated which 
  would seriously injure another person. See Affidavit of Joel Brockner, Ph.D., Exh. "A-3" hereto. 

  1. ) Grill had an Extensive Past Criminal Record Evidencing Reckless Behavior, 

  and Involvement with Alcohol and Drugs 

  Grill had an extensive criminal arrest history prior to being hired by Landmark in a 
  position of authority. In 1976, Grill was arrested by Palm Beach County, Florida, Sheriffs 
  office for felony possession of marijuana, possession of narcotic equipment, and possession of 
  synthetic narcotics. Grill Depo at p. 27. On April 30, 1979, Grill was arrested by the Pompano 
  Beach Police Department and charged with misdemeanor possession of marijuana, the felony of 
  carrying a concealed weapon and three separate traffic offenses. Grill Depo at p. 57-58. On 
  November 22, 1987, Grill was arrested by the DelRay Beach, Florida, Police Department for 
  disorderly conduct and resisting arrest. Grill Depo at p. 62-63. This incident occurred when 
  Grill told law enforcement officials that their mothers and daughters "gave good head," all of 
  which Grill thought was "fun." Grill Depo at p. 64. 

  2. ) Prior to Being Hired Bv Landmark, Grill had No Qualifications For Dealing 

  With Women in a Vulnerable Position 

  Prior to the time Landmark picked Grill to lead its Dallas operation, Grill had never held 
  any job which would qualify him to deal in a position of authority and responsibility with 
  vulnerable persons such as Tracy Neff in the context of the types of programs presented by 
  Landmark. Grill's application shows that he worked from 1973 until 1983 for Kelly's Custom 



  3 Where a master is charged with hiring or retaining in his employ an incompetent servant, the 
  servant's character is then in issue and may be proven by evidence of reputation or of specific 
  conduct for the purpose of showing that the master knew or by exercising ordinary care should 
  have known of the servant's incompetence. Estate of Arrington v. Fields, 578 S.W.2d 173, 179 
  (Tex. Civ. App. - Tyler 1979, writ ref d n.r.e.); Porter v. Nemir, 900 S.W.2d 376, 380 (Tex. 
  App. - Austin 1995, no writ); See also Tex. R. Civ. Ev. 405(b). Evidence of sexual encounters 
  with other women, and of other bad acts are admissible to show the reckless and manipulative 
  behavior of an employee charged with sexual misdeeds. See, e.g., Porter at 382. 



  PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 5 



  s:\motions\nefT.tra\msjresponsedrait3 



  Trim, where he helped build exotic custom cars. See Grill Application, Exh. "A-l"; Grill Depo 
  at p.97-98. Grill testified that he left that job, although if Landmark had called his references, 
  his boss would probably say he was fired. Grill Depo at p. 102. After a four month gap, Grill 
  went to work in November, 1983 for J. Vitolo Construction and listed his job as "ran 
  construction project." Grill's application showed he stopped working for Vitolo Construction in 
  1989, but he listed no other employment from that time until the time of his application with 
  Landmark. See Application Exh. "A-l ." 

  When asked to list special skills which would qualify Grill as a center manager, Grill 
  listed that he was a "carpenter." Grill Application at Exh. "A-l ."; Grill Depo at 97-98. 

  Grill had applied at Landmark three years before he was finally hired in January 1991. 
  The first time he applied he had been turned down because he "owed too much money." Grill 
  Depo at p. 84. However, after a sexual relationship with Landmark center manager Cindy 
  DiCosimo, she recommended to Landmark that he be hired. Grill Depo at p. 92-93. 

  Prior to working at Landmark, Grill considered himself addicted to cocaine. Grill Depo 
  at p. 33. Further, Grill says that he had taken his life in his own hands by abusing alcohol and 
  drugs on "countless" occasions prior to his employment with Landmark. Nevertheless, 
  Landmark apparently did no background check and did not check any of Grill's references. 
  Deposition of Patricia Dillon, Exh. "A- 12" hereto, hereafter Dillon Depo. Instead, Landmark put 
  Grill in charge of their Dallas facility, where he would be in a position of responsibility, 
  leadership and authority over women such as Tracy Neff who were in vulnerable states of mind. 

  B. Landmark was Negligent in Retaining Grill, after his Record of Reckless. Drunken 
  and Abusive Behavior 

  Grill's abuse of alcohol, drags and women did not end with his employment at 
  Landmark, but such reckless activity continued in a well-documented pattern up until the time 
  Tracy Neff was assaulted. 4 

  1.) Grill Evidenced a Pattern of Behavior that was Reckless. Aleohohlic and 
  Abusive Toward Women In 1991. 1992 and 1993 That Was Known to 
  Landmark 



  4 It can reasonably be inferred that Landmark kept Grill on staff because he was a "producer." 
  By memo dated January 1993, Grill's supervisor Ingrid authorized a salary increase for Grill, 
  noting that he did "122% of Forum Target, 105% Adv. Target, 141% of Seminar Target, 40% of 
  TCC Target, 108% of SEL Target. DFW revenue was $338,000, with at 19% operating surplus 
  [and had] 100 persons in 'Assistants Program.'" [Personnel file Exh. "A-l" hereto ] In fact, over 
  the course of his employment with Landmark, Grill was given a total of four salary increases 
  based on performance, [id.] Grill testified that he took the center from worst in the nation to 
  number one, in terms of profitability and revenue. Grill Depo atl44-146. 

  PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 6 
  s:\motions\neff.tra\msjresponsedraft3 



  Sometime before August 1992, when Grill had only been on staff for Landmark for 
  approximatefy a year, Grill had a confrontation with chief executive officer Harry Rosenberg at a 
  gathering of Landmark insiders at Dave's Bar in San Francisco. Grill Depo at 45-46. In this 
  confrontation, Grill was so intoxicated from drinking martinis that he told Rosenberg (or his 
  sister, Joan, the director of the Centers Division of Landmark Education and also directly above 
  Grill in the chain-of-command) to "fuck himself." Grill Depo at p. 46, 232. 

  By memorandum dated September 16, 1992, Landmark manager Tirzah Cohen placed 
  Grill on probation on probation because Grill had 

  (1) falsified enrollments; 

  (2) embezzled money from Landmark; 

  (3) had sexual relationships with 13 Landmark participants; 

  (4) frequently driven while drunk; and, 

  (5) engaged in inappropriate behavior with graduates while intoxicated. 

  See Personnel File, Exh. "A-l" hereto. Grill had conversations with Cohen and his supervisor 
  Ingrid Cain in August, 1992 wherein he admitted each of the items listed in the Cohen 
  memorandum. Grill Depo at p. 154. With regard to his sexual relationships with participants, 
  Grill was told that such behavior was absolutely inappropriate, and Grill had to meet with each of 
  his thirteen known sexual partners in the presence of a Landmark management employee in order 
  to "complete" with them about his inappropriate behavior. 5 Grill Depo at p. 172-73. 

  Although a memorandum in Grill's file indicates he successfully completed the term of 
  his 1992 probation, Grill testified that he was "on probation" "most of the time" he was 
  employed by Landmark for getting "in trouble." Grill Depo at 1 50. 

  Sometime in 1993, Grill kicked in the door to a hotel room at the Reunion Hyatt Regency 
  in Dallas, Texas in order to get into a hotel room where one of his sexual partners was located. 
  The following day, Grill's supervisor at Landmark telephoned him about the incident, and told 
  him that his behavior needed to be appropriate for a center manager at all times and in all places. 
  Grill Depo at 262-263. 

  2.) Grill's Pattern of Behavior that was Reckless, Alcohohlic and Abusive 
  Toward Women Escalated In 1994 



  5 Knowledge of prior sexual relationships with program participants was enough to give 
  Landmark knowledge of the possibility of the sexual assault of Tracy Neff . Porter v. Nemir, 
  900 S.W.2d 376 (Tex. App. - Austin, 1995, no writ) (knowledge that unlicensed drug treatment 
  counselor had inappropriate sexual relationship with a prior patient made sexual assault of 
  subsequent program participant forseeable to his employer, despite that the sexual assault of the 
  plaintiff in that case (1) began as a consensual relationship, (2) occurred off-premises and after- 
  hours). 

  PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 7 
  s:\rootions\neff.tra\msjresporssedraft3 



  a.) 



  Miadie Dodsoe Complaints 



  In February, 1994, a woman named Mindie Dodson came to work under Grill's 
  supervision in Dallas. Deposition of Mindie Dodson, Exh. "A-14", hereto, hereafter Dodson 
  Depo. On her first da}' of work, Grill took her to a bar and ordered a bottle of Cuervo. While 
  drinking the tequila, he told Mindie that he thought she was beautiful, he wanted to marry her, 
  and that he had previously torn up a photograph submitted with her application when he found 
  she was a lesbian. Dodson Depo at p. 33-36. Shortly thereafter, Dodson complained to 
  Landmark human resources director Fred Lange during which she told him she was having a 
  hard time dealing with Grill's sexual harassment. Dodson Depo at p. 157. 

  On numerous occasions, Mindie Dodson observed what she considered to be violent 
  behavior on the part of David Grill, including (1) having him slam his fist down in front of her 
  face [Dodson Depo at p. 57]; (2) seeing him repeatedly pound on a copy machine because it 
  wouldn't work [Dodson Depo at p. 61-62]; (3) having him get in her face and yell five times "I 
  hate your guts and I don't trust you." [Dodson Depo at p. 60-62] Mindie also observed Grill 
  drive drunk "most nights." [Dodson Depo at p. 67-68] David Grill himself does not deny that 
  these things took place. Grill Depo at p. 214-217. 

  Mindie Dodson also observed Grill engaging in sexually inappropriate behavior, directed 
  toward herself and toward other women. Grill would specifically go through applications to 
  certain Landmark programs, and Grill told Mindie Dodson he was "looking for a wife" in the 
  program applications. Dodson Depo at p. 80. During a Landmark function in Atlanta, Georgia, 
  Grill stated that a female participant would be a "good fuck," which was overheard by the 
  participant's boyfriend. 6 Dodson Depo, p. 85-86. Grill acknowledged that this occurred. Grill 
  Depo at p. 259. Further, while Mindie Dodson was on staff, Grill showed her two people having 
  sex on computer screen. Dodson Depo at p. 47-50. In May of 1994, Grill showed Mindie 
  Dodson a copy of Playboy magazine (his subscription was sent to the Landmark facility) and 
  said "I wonder what you'd look like in here." Dodson Depo at p. 52, Grill Depo at p. 264. After 
  May, 1994, Dodson and Grill traveled to Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, on Landmark business, and 
  Grill booked a single hotel room for them to stay in. 'Dodson Depo at p. 78. After these 
  incidents, Grill told Ms. Dodson that he knew he was going to be charged with sexual 
  harassment. Dodson Depo at p. 56. 

  Grill had a cocaine abuse problem prior to his association with Landmark [Grill Depo at 
  p. 32-33] and had a relapse one weekend at while at Landmark headquarters in San Francisco. 
  Grill Depo at p. 35. Further, Grill told Mindie Dodson that he had told "his boss" at Landmark. 
  Dodson Depo at p. 63-64. Grill confirmed that he probably told his supervisor at Landmark, Pat 
  Dillon. Grill Depo at p. 34. 



  6 Grill's supervisor, Patricia Dillon, acknowledged that she was aware of the incident in Atlanta. 
  Dillon Depo at p. 278. 

  1 Grill apparently still sees nothing inappropriate in this action. Grill Depo at p. 206-207. 

  PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 8 
  s:\motions\neff.tra\msjresponsedraft3 



  Also in May of 1994, Mindie Dodson observed Grill screaming at Landmark 
  management employee Jerry Baden, only two inches from his face, in a disagreement over the 
  proper way to set up a seminar room. Dodson Depo at p. 107. 

  In June, 1994, Ms. Dodson's tolerance for Grill's abusive behavior was at end. In that 
  month Dodson initiated a conference call with Baden, a Landmark Forum leader who was 
  Dodson's primary contact with management, in which Mindie told Baden that Grill was drunk a 
  lot, was hung over a lot, threw up in the shower every morning, was going out a lot at night, had 
  tried to make Mindie's life miserable after he found out she was a lesbian, and had showed her 
  the sex on the computer and nude women in Playboy. Dodson Depo at p. 58-59. 

  When Grill's behavior did not improve, Dodson was forced to quit her work with 
  Landmark in late June or early July of 1994. Before she left Dallas, however, she had an in- 
  person interview with Grill's supervisor, Patricia Dillon, and a telephone conversation with Fred 
  Lange, Landmark's head of human resources, about Grill's behavior. See Dillon Depo at p. 252; 
  Dodson Depo at p. 90-94. Dotson told Dillon that Grill frequently came to work hung over, that 
  his behavior was inconsistent, about the Playboy incident (discussed supra), about Grill's violent 
  behavior in the center, and about the Oklahoma hotel room incident (discussed supra). Dodson 
  Depo at p. 90-92. Dodson told Lange about Grill's drunkenness, and mood swings, as well as 
  violent behavior. Grill was, again, put on probation (where he'd spent most of his career at 
  Landmark) but no other substantive action was taken. Dillon Depo at p. 253-262. 

  b.) Robin Adelson Complaints 

  Soon after Mindie Dodson left, Robin Adelson, a high-level Landmark volunteer and 
  former Dallas staff member sent a letter directed to Landmark chief executive officer Harry 
  Rosenberg dated July 14, 1994. See Exh. "A-l"; Deposition of Robin Adelson, Exh. "A-13" 
  hereto, hereafter Adelson Depo, at p. 44. The letter states that Grill was coming to work with an 
  "obvious hangover, including the 'shakes,' [and that he was] irascible to key assistants and staff, 
  screaming loud enough for guests to hear." The letter also alluded to the Playboy incident 
  (discussed supra) and accused Grill of making lewd and/or disrespectful comments to 
  participants, graduates, assistants and staff. Importantly, the letter suggests that interviews be 
  done of people working near Grill. [See personnel file, Exh. "A-l."] However, although Grill's 
  Landmark supervisors say that they went over the allegations contained in the letter with Grill, 
  nothing substantive was done in the way of investigation or by way of remedy. Dillon Depo at p. 
  272-273. 

  By letter dated August 5, 1994, Robin Adelson sent a second letter to corporate 
  management at Landmark, this time directing her letter to Patricia Dillon and sending copies to 
  Harry Rosenberg and Joan Rosenberg. Adelson Depo at p. 27. This second letter, co-authored 
  with Landmark volunteer Vickie Bishop, stepped up the tone and tenor of the complaints that 
  Grill's behavior was completely out of control. The letter put Landmark management on notice 
  that Grill was frequently drunk "beyond verbal and motor control", had mentioned to a 
  Landmark staff member that he frequently vomited in the shower, was having wild mood swings, 
  was making erratic decisions, had memory lapses, displayed sexist and bigoted outbursts, was 



  PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 9 
  s:\motions\neff.tra\msjresponsetirafl3 



  womanizing and had a violent temper. The letter alleges that Grill had no respect for women. 
  The letter goes on to advise Landmark management that Grill was "ongoingly dat[ing]" 
  Landmark students, searching for them via their applications, and "ha[d] problems with powerful 
  women, avoid[ed] intimacy, [was] sexist, volatile, lie[d], bulliejd] and manipulate^ people]." 
  [See Personnel file, Exh. "A-l"] 

  In response, Grill's supervisor Patricia Dillon merely reiterated her same old warning, but 
  otherwise took no response. See Dillon Depo at p. 248, 265-67, Dillon memo of 2/28/95. 
  Within two (2) months of Landmark's receipt of this letter, Grill reviewed Tracy Neff s 
  application and began his sexual pursuit of her. Grill Depo at p.261. 

  The failure of Landmark to address the erratic, violent behavior of David Grill was clear 
  negligence on the part of Landmark. Given Grill's record, Landmark's failure to deal 
  substantively with the problems, and Landmark's choice to retain Grill in a job where he was in a 
  position of leadership and authority over vulnerable women such as Tracy Neff, was clearly 
  negligent management by Landmark. Affidavit of Joel Brockner, Ph.D., hereafter Brockner 
  Aff., Exh. "A-3" hereto. 

  III. 

  THE SIMM. ASSAULT OF TRACY NEFF WAS FORSEEABLE BY 
  LANDMARK EDUCATION CORPORATION 

  Landmark has moved for summary judgment on Plaintiff Tracy Neff s negligence claims 
  against Landmark by alleging that Landmark could not have foreseen that their negligence in 
  hiring and retaining Grill might result in Grill's assaultive behavior. Apparently, Landmark's 
  position is that, because they were not aware of any prior rapes by Grill, they had no reason to 
  suspect a rape might occur in this case. 

  The Texas Supreme Court has held that prior sexual assaults are not a prerequisite for 
  determining whether a particular sexual assault is foreseeable. Nixon v. Mister Property 
  Management, 690 S.W.2d 546, 550 (Tex. 1985) (reversing a summary judgment in favor of a 
  defendant who claimed a rape on his premises was not foreseeable). "It is not required that the 
  particular [incident] complained of should have been foreseen. All that is required is 'that the 
  injury be of such a general character as might reasonably have been anticipated;' and that the 
  injured party should be so situated with relation to the wrongful act that injury to him or to one 
  similarly situated might reasonably have been foreseen." Nixon at 550, citing Carey v. Pure 
  Distributing Corp., 133 Tex. 31, 124 S.W.2d 847, 849 (1939). Thus, there is no requirement 
  that Landmark should have been able to foresee rape, only that the general character of injury be 
  reasonably foreseen. Id. 

  Certainly, given Grill's well-documented history of alcoholic, sexist, abusive, violent 
  erratic and irresponsible behavior, together with his particular history of dating program 
  participants, Landmark officials could have reasonably foreseen that Grill was likely to engage in 
  behavior that would put participants in a great degree of risk, including but not limited to 
  irresponsible behavior while intoxicated, sexual harassment, violence and sexual assault. See 



  PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 10 



  s:\motions\neff.tra\msjresponsedraft3 



  Affidavit of Joel Brockner, Ph.D., Exh, "A-3." Further, by placing Grill in a position where 
  persons in a vulnerable state of mind would be particularly susceptible to a high degree of undue 
  influence and suggestion from Grill, Landmark could have reasonably foreseen that Grill would 
  manipulate vulnerable women such as Tracy Neff into a position where he could sexually assault 
  them, particularly if he was intoxicated. Affidavit of Rick Ross, Exh. "A-4." 

  As a matter of Texas law, "Individuals... who have been sexually abused as children are 
  especially vulnerable to sexual exploitation by a counselor." Porter v. Netnir, 900 S.W.2d 376, 
  386 (Tex. App. - Austin 1995, no writ). Tracy Neff had been sexually abused, and Landmark 
  and David Grill knew about the prior assault because Tracy put that information in her initial 
  Forum information sheet, which was reviewed by Grill and Tracy's Forum leader. See Neff 
  Application, Grill Depo at 261. Tracy had come to Landmark with the express purpose of 
  dealing with this complex emotional problem. Neff Application. In a situation-- such as in the 
  context of the programs presented to Neff by Landmark- where persons are in turmoil due to 
  self examination, Landmark had a "heightened obligation to hire and retain" competent 
  employees because their programs treat a psychologically fragile clientele. Porter at 386. Where 
  a person in authority in such a situation has even dated one prior program participant, that 
  individual's employer has reason to know that the person is incompetent and must investigate the 
  situation in order to ascertain whether program policies are being violated and program 
  participants are at risk. Id. 

  Landmark was aware that Grill had had a sexual relationship with at least thirteen 
  participants prior to September 16, 1992. See Grill Depo at p. 161. Further, Robin Adelson's 
  letters put Landmark on notice that Grill was "ongoingly dating participants" in Landmark's 
  programs. Clearly, Landmark had notice that their Dallas leader would engage in inappropriate 
  dating and sexual relationships with program participants. Porter at 386. 

  It is interesting that Landmark should claim it could not foresee that a volatile and 
  dangerous situation was developing, when clearly it was obvious to everyone else involved. 
  Grill himself stated on numerous occasions that he knew he was going to get in trouble for sexual 
  inappropriateness. Dodson Depo at p. 50-52. Further, Robin Adelson's letter dated August 5, 
  1994 contains the following statements: 

  ... as an ongoing participant in this work for years, it would be dishonest for me 
  not to say that I'm also wondering how such blatantly unprofessional behavior 
  could be totally unknown to you, especially given the incidents that gave rise to 
  David's having been on probation. If it is know to management, is it being 
  ignored or overlooked? . . . There is no corporation in the world that would allow 
  managment to interact with employees the way David does and not be n court 
  eventually . . . Given David's ongoingly sexually inappropriate interactions with 
  and about women, it is a miracle that no suit has been brought for sexual 
  harassment . . . 

  Personnel File, Exh. "A-l." Given the clear notice that Adelson, Dodson and others gave to 
  Landmark, the only reason the company did not foresee the events giving rise to this law suit is 



  PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUM MARY JUDGMENT -Page 11 
  s:\motions\neff.tra\msjresponsedraft3 



  because they were ignoring the clear signals that something was severely wrong with Grill and 
  that someone was going to get hurt. 



  IV. 

  LANDMARK'S NEGLIGENT HIRING AND RETENTION 
  OF GRILL WAS THE CAUSE IN FACT OF THE 
  SEXUAL ASSAULT ON TRACY NEFF 

  Landmark has understandably attempted to distance itself from the assault of Tracy Neff 
  by its employee, David Grill, by arguing Landmark's negligence in hiring and retaining Grill 
  cannot be the cause in fact of the assault because the assault did not take place on Landmark 
  property, during business hours, and was not expressly done to further Landmark's business. 
  Landmark's arguments confuse two legal principles: (1) Plaintiff argues that Landmark is 
  responsible for the negligence and intentional acts of its employee Grill under the doctrine of 
  resondeat superior because Grill was acting within the course and scope of his actual and 
  apparent authority as an employee of Landmark at the time of the sexual assault, and (2) Plaintiff 
  asserts that Landmark's own independent acts of negligence in hiring and retaining Grill was also 
  a proximate cause of Tracy Neff s injuries. Landmark relies heavily on Doe v. Boys Clubs of 
  Greater Dallas, Inc., 907 S.W.2d 472 (Tex. 1995) for the proposition that Landmark's negligent 
  hiring and retention were too remote from the rape to have constituted legal cause in fact 
  Landmark also cites two cases which have held that an employer cannot be held responsible for 
  the assault of an employee under respondeat superior because an employee ordinarily does not 
  commit an assault within the course and scope of his employment. Mackey v. U.P. Enterprises, 
  Inc., 935 S.W.2d 446 (Tex. App. - Tyler 1996, no writ); Dieter v. Baker Service Tools, 739 
  S.W.2d 405 (Tex. App. - Corpus Christi 1987, writ denied). 

  A. Grill's Actions in Manipulating Neff Were Within His Actual and Apparent 
  Authority as Dallas Center Manager 

  If David Grill's actions were within the course and scope of his actual and apparent 
  authority as an employee of Landmark, then Landmark's causation arguments must fail because 
  it is undisputed that the actions of David Grill in assaulting Tracy Neff were the cause of here 
  damages. Under the doctrine of respondeat superior, the principle is vicariously liable for the 
  actions of the agent. Dieter, 739 S.W.2d at 408. There is ample summary judgment proof to 
  indicate that David Grill was acting within the course and scope of his employment whenever he 
  socialized with graduates and participants of the Landmark programs: 

  After Grill lacked in a hotel room door to gain access to the room of a woman with whom 
  he was having a sexual relationship, he was told by Landmark management that he was required 
  to be an example of the Landmark philosophies at all times and in all places. Grill Depo at 262- 
  263. 



  PLAINTIFFS RESPONSE TO LA NDMARK' S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 12 
  s:\motions\neff.tra\msjresponsedraft3 



  David Grill considered it his job to make things "fun" to participate in Landmark in 
  Dallas, and made it a point to socialize with Landmark participants. Grill Depo at 144-146. 

  Landmark apparently considered it within their authority to discipline Grill for having 
  sexual relations with program participants, and put Grill on probation for this behavior in 
  September of 1992. Personnel file. Grill Depo at p. 154, 172-173. 

  By memorandum dated February 28, 1995, Grill's supervisor Patricia Dillon 
  memorialized a conversation with Grill in July of 1994, wherein Grill "was clear that the 
  behavior outlined in the letter was inappropriate for a Center manager [and] agreed that his 
  actions as a manager from that point on would be consistent with that of a Center Manager of 
  LEC at all times both in and out of the center." Exh. "A-l" 

  In the same February 28, 1995 memorandum, Dillon states that she "[w]arned [Grill] that 
  if there was another complaint of his behavior either inside or outside the center that he would 
    be terminated." [emphasis added] Exh. "A-l" 

    In a memorandum dated October 5, 1994 Patricia Dillon outlined conversations she had 
    had with Grill regarding the allegations contained in the Robin Adelson letters (discussed supra) 
    "With regard to both letters, Joan [Rosenberg] and she had a conference call with David and 
    went over each point of the letters. We specifically requested that he not try to find out who sent 
    them. David is now causing Center Manager at all times, in all places, inside and outside the 
    center. I requested that David stop yelling and stop drinking... He no longer has alcohol around 
    the graduates..." Exh. "A-l" 

    Because Grill was acting within the course and scope of his actual and apparent authority 
    as a Landmark employee at all times and in all places, including while engaging in sexual 
    relationships with program participants, Landmark is vicariously liable for Grill's negligent and 
    intentional acts. Certainly, it cannot be argued that Grill's acts were not a proximate cause of 
    Tracy Neff s injuries. 

    B. The Negligence of Landmark in Hirin g and Retaining Grill was a Cause in Fact of 
    Neff s Injuries 

    An entirely separate issue raised by Landmark's Motion is whether the independent acts 
    of negligence on the part of Landmark in hiring and retaining Grill were the cause in fact of 
    Tracy Neff s assault. 8 Negligent retention involves "the master's own negligence in ... retaining 
    in his employ an incompetent servant whom the master knows or by the exercise of reasonable 



    ' Defendant's reliance on Machey v. U.P. Enterprises, Inc., 935 S.W.2d 446 (Tex. App. - Tyler 
    1 996, no writ) is misplaced because the Plaintiff in that case was not proceeding under a theory 
    of negligent retention and hiring. The act complained of by Plaintiff in this case is not merely a 
    vicarious liability claim, but also that Defendant Landmark engaged in its own independent acts 
    of negligence by hiring and retaining Grill when it knew or should have known of his propensity 
    to harm Tracy Neff and others similarly situated. 

    PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK' S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 13 
    s:\motions\neff.tra\msjresponsedraft3 



    care should have known was incompetent or unfit." Porter v. Nemir, 900 S.W.2d at 385. Cause 
    in fact in a negligent hiring and retention case merely requires that the negligent act or omission 
    of the employer was a "substantial factor" in bringing about the injury and without which no 
    harm would have occurred. Nixon v. Mister Property Management 690 S.W.2d 546, 549 (Tex. 
    1985). 

    Even in cases where the intentional acts of an employee have been held not to have been 
    committed within the course and scope of the employee's job. nevertheless a Plaintiff can still 
    prevail on a negligent hiring and retention theory. Dieter v. Baker Service Tools, 739 S.W.2d 
    405 (Tex. App. - Corpus Christi 1987, writ denied) (reversing summary judgment for an 
    employer on a negligent hiring claim although an assault was held not to have occurred within 
    the course and scope of the employee). In Dieter {supra, and cited by Landmark) the Corpus 
    Christi court of appeals held that liability for negligent hiring and supervision is not dependent 
    upon a finding that the employee was within the course and scope of his employment when the 
    tortious act occurred. Id. at 407. 

    Further, there is no requirement that the intentional act occur on the premises of the 
    employer, or within the working or business hours of the employee. 9 Retention of an incompetent 
    employee can be the cause in fact of a sexual assault which occurs off the premises and after the 
    business hours of the defendant employer, where the employee gained the confidence and trust of 
    the sexual abuse victim "through the cloak of responsibility" as an employee of the defendant 
    employer. Porter v. Nemir, 900 S.W.2d at 386. 

    There is ample evidence that Grill manipulated Tracy Neff and sexually assaulted her 
    through the use of his position within Landmark. Tracy Neff met Grill at the Landmark Center, 

    5 Defendant Landmark's reliance on Doe v. Boys Clubs of Greater Dallas, 907 S.W.2d 472 (Tex. 
    1995) for the proposition that there is no cause in fact in the present case is misplaced. In Doe, a 
    Boys Club volunteer had been assigned to the club as part of his community service obligations 
    secondary to a DWI conviction. After the volunteer met two young boys at the club, he became 
    friends with the boys' grandparents, and visited their home on at least ten occasions. On several 
    overnight camping trips over a three year time period, the volunteer sexually assaulted the boys. 
    The Supreme Court rightly held that the failure of the Club to investigate the volunteer's criminal 
    record could not constitute the cause in fact of the assaults because (1) full disclosure of the 
    criminal record would not have prevented the volunteer from being at the club, and (2) the 
    grandparents were specifically told that the club did not endorse relationships between boys and 
    volunteers outside the supervision of the club. In the case at bar, thorough investigation of 
    Grill's behavior would have disclosed that he had a propensity to engage in reckless, violent and 
    abusive behavior, to date participants of Landmark's programs and engage in sexually 
    inappropriate behavior. Certainly, if Grill's problem behaviors had been addressed properly by- 
    Defendant Landmark, Grill should never have been allowed to manipulate Tracy Neff under the 
    cloak of Landmark authority. Further, Tracy Neff met Grill at the Landmark Center, where he 
    was the manager, and was never around Grill outside the ever-enveloping context of Landmark 
    and its programs. The night of the rape, Grill first approached Neff at the Landmark facility. 

    PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 14 
    s:\tiiGtions\neff.tra\msjresponsedraft3 



    and knew he was the center manager, a position of trust and authority within Landmark. Neff 
    Affidavit, Exh. "16." Neff was told that Grill was the highest example of the Landmark 
    philosophies. Neff Affidavit, Exh. "16." Although Tracy Neff felt uncomfortable having sexual 
    relations with Grill, he told her that it was acceptable behavior under the Landmark philosophies. 
    Neff Affidavit. On the night of the sexual assault, Neff encountered Grill at the Landmark 
    facility. Neff Affidavit, Exh. "16." Grill manipulated Tracy Neff back to his apartment by 
    telling her he needed to share with her, which is a Landmark "buzz word." Neff Affidavit. 
    Further, the Landmark program fostered dependence by Tracy Neff on the suggestions of leaders 
    like Grill, such that Neff was easily manipulated into the situation of race. Rick Ross Affidavit. 
    Exh. "A-4" 

    Despite Landmark's attempts to distance themselves from Grill's atrocious acts, it was 
    undisputedly the fact that Landmark allowed Grill to be in a position of leadership around 
    vulnerable women such as Tracy Neff that was the cause in fact of the sexual assault of Tracy 
    Neff. See, Affidavit of Joel Brockner, Exh. "A-3." This Court should deny summary judgment 
    on this issue and allow the claim to proceed to trial on the merits. 

    V. 

    LANDMARK INTENTIONALLY INFLICTED 
    EMOTIONAL DISTRESS ON TRACY NEFF 

    With regard to the intentional infliction of emotional distress claims, Landmark merely 
    claims that because Landmark did not "authorize or direct" the assault on Tracy Neff, that 
    Landmarks' behavior cannot, as a matter of law, be extreme and outrageous. Tracy Neff would 
    assert that, given Grill's record of violence, alcoholism and reckless behavior, Landmark's 
    behavior in repeatedly ignoring such behavior and thereby intentionally putting program 
    participants at risk was, indeed, behavior that should be regarded as "atrocious, and utterly 
    intolerable in a civilized community." Twyman v. Twyman, 855 S.W.2d 619 (Tex. 1993). 

    WHEREFORE, PREMISES CONSIDERED, Tracy Neff respectfully prays that 
    Landmark's Motion for Summary Judgment be denied. 



    PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 15 



    s:\motions\neff.tra\msjresponsedrait3 



    Respectfully submitted, 



    BY 



    STOVALL & ASSOCIATES. P.C. 



    PjMBERLY A. STOVALL, ESQUIRE 

    AeBarNo. 19337000 
    JAY C. ENGLISH, ESQUIRE 
    State Bar No. 06625290 
    North Central Plaza Three, Suite 550 
    12801 North Central Expressway 
    Dallas, Texas 75243 
    (972) 774-1276, phone 
    (972) 774-0733, fax 



    ATTORNEYS FOR PLAINTIFF 



    CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 

    This is to certify that a True and correct copy of the above and foregoing document has 
    been forwarded by certified mail, return receipt requested to the following counsel of record on 
    this f)(] day of (qc^t , 1998: 



    Robert Roby, Esquire 
    GWINN & ROBY 
    4100 Renaissance Tower 
    1201 Elm Street 
    Dallas, Texas 75270 



    VIA CM/RRR NO. Z 557 998 693 



    George R. Milner, III 
    2515 McKinney Avenue 
    Suite 1500, L.B. 21 
    Dallas, Texas 75201 



    VIA CM/RRR NO. Z 557 998 692 




    tet CA.NGLISH. ESQUIRE 



    PLAINTIFF'S RESPONSE TO LANDMARK'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT -Page 16 



    s:\rnotions\neff.tra\nisjresponsedraft3 
